### Murphy v. American Home Products Corp., 58 N.Y.2d 293 (1983)

#### JONES, J.

Plaintiff, Joseph Murphy, was first employed by defendant, American Home Products Corp., in 1957. He thereafter served in various accounting positions, eventually attaining the office of assistant treasurer, but he never had a formal contract of employment. On April 18, 1980, when he was 59 years old, he was discharged.

Plaintiff claims that he was fired for two reasons: because of his disclosure to top management of alleged accounting improprieties on the part of corporate personnel and because of his age. As to the first ground, plaintiff asserts that his firing was in retaliation for his revelation to officers and directors of defendant corporation that he had uncovered at least $50 million in illegal account manipulations of secret pension reserves which improperly inflated the company's growth in income and allowed high-ranking officers to reap unwarranted bonuses from a management incentive plan, as well as in retaliation for his own refusal to engage in the alleged accounting improprieties. He contends that the company's internal regulations required him to make the disclosure that he did. He also alleges that his termination was carried out in a humiliating manner.

As to the second basis for his termination, plaintiff claims that defendant's top financial officer told him on various occasions that he wished he could fire plaintiff but that, because to do so would be illegal due to plaintiff's age, he would make sure by confining him to routine work that plaintiff did not advance in the company. Plaintiff also asserts that a contributing factor to his dismissal was that he was over 50 years of age.

As his first cause of action, plaintiff alleged that his discharge "was wrongful, malicious and in bad faith" and that defendant was bound "not to dismiss its employees for reasons that are contrary to public policy". In his second cause of action, plaintiff claimed that his dismissal "was intended to and did cause plaintiff severe mental and emotional distress thereby damaging plaintiff". His third claim was based on an allegation that the manner of his termination "was deliberately and viciously insulting, was designed to and did embarrass and humiliate plaintiff and was intended to and did cause plaintiff severe mental and emotional distress thereby damaging plaintiff". In his fourth cause of action, plaintiff asserted that, although his employment contract was of indefinite duration, the law imposes in every employment contract "the requirement that an employer shall deal with each employee fairly and in good faith". On that predicate he alleged that defendant's conduct in stalling his advancement and ultimately firing him for his disclosures "breached the terms of its contract requiring good faith and fair dealing toward plaintiff and damaged plaintiff thereby". Plaintiff demanded compensatory and punitive damages.

Defendant moved to dismiss the complaint on the grounds that it failed to state a cause of action. Defendant contended that plaintiff was an at-will employee subject to discharge at any time, that New York does not recognize a tort action for abusive or wrongful discharge, and that the prima facie tort and intentional infliction of emotional distress claims were unavailable and insufficient.

With respect to his first cause of action, plaintiff urges that the time has come when the courts of New York should recognize the tort of abusive or wrongful discharge of an at-will employee. To do so would alter our long-settled rule that where an employment is for an indefinite term it is presumed to be a hiring at will which may be freely terminated by either party at any time for any reason or even for no reason. Plaintiff argues that a trend has emerged in the courts of other States to temper what is perceived as the unfairness of the traditional rule by allowing a cause of action in tort to redress abusive discharges. He accurately points out that this tort has elsewhere been recognized to hold employers liable for dismissal of employees in retaliation for employee conduct that is protected by public policy. Thus, the abusive discharge doctrine has been applied to impose liability on employers where employees have been discharged for disclosing illegal activities on the part of their employers, where employees have been terminated due to their service on jury duty, and where employees have been dismissed because they have filed workers' compensation claims. Plaintiff would have this court adopt this emerging view. We decline his invitation, being of the opinion that such a significant change in our law is best left to the Legislature.

Those jurisdictions that have modified the traditional at-will rule appear to have been motivated by conclusions that the freedom of contract underpinnings of the rule have become outdated, that individual employees in the modern work force do not have the bargaining power to negotiate security for the jobs on which they have grown to rely, and that the rule yields harsh results for those employees who do not enjoy the benefits of express contractual limitations on the power of dismissal. Whether these conclusions are supportable or whether for other compelling reasons employers should, as a matter of policy, be held liable to at-will employees discharged in circumstances for which no liability has existed at common law, are issues better left to resolution at the hands of the Legislature. In addition to the fundamental question whether such liability should be recognized in New York, of no less practical importance is the definition of its configuration if it is to be recognized.

Both of these aspects of the issue, involving perception and declaration of relevant public policy (the underlying determinative consideration with respect to tort liability in general) are best and more appropriately explored and resolved by the legislative branch of our government. The Legislature has infinitely greater resources and procedural means to discern the public will, to examine the variety of pertinent considerations, to elicit the views of the various segments of the community that would be directly affected and in any event critically interested, and to investigate and anticipate the impact of imposition of such liability. Standards should doubtless be established applicable to the multifarious types of employment and the various circumstances of discharge. If the rule of nonliability for termination of at-will employment is to be tempered, it should be accomplished through a principled statutory scheme, adopted after opportunity for public ventilation, rather than in consequence of judicial resolution of the partisan arguments of individual adversarial litigants.

Additionally, if the rights and obligations under a relationship forged, perhaps some time ago, between employer and employee in reliance on existing legal principles are to be significantly altered, a fitting accommodation of the competing interests to be affected may well dictate that any change should be given prospective effect only, or at least so the Legislature might conclude.

For all the reasons stated, we conclude that recognition in New York State of tort liability for what has become known as abusive or wrongful discharge should await legislative action.

Plaintiff's second cause of action is framed in terms of a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress. To survive a motion to dismiss, plaintiff's allegations must satisfy the rule set out in Restatement of Torts, Second, that: "One who by extreme and outrageous conduct intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress to another is subject to liability for such emotional distress". Comment _d_ to that section notes that: "Liability has been found only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community". The facts alleged by plaintiff regarding the manner of his termination fall far short of this strict standard. Further, in light of our holding above that there is now no cause of action in tort in New York for abusive or wrongful discharge of an at-will employee, plaintiff should not be allowed to evade that conclusion or to subvert the traditional at-will contract rule by casting his cause of action in terms of a tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress.

Plaintiff's third cause of action was also properly dismissed. If considered, as plaintiff would have us, as intended to allege a prima facie tort it is deficient inasmuch as there is no allegation that his discharge was without economic or social justification. Moreover, we held in _James v Board of Educ._, which also involved the exercise of an unrestricted right to discharge an employee, that: "Plaintiff cannot, by the device of an allegation that the sole reason for the termination of his employment by these public officials acting within the ambit of their authority was to harm him without justification (a contention which could be advanced with respect to almost any such termination), bootstrap himself around a motion addressed to the pleadings". Nor does the conclusory allegation of malice by plaintiff here supply the deficiency. As with the intentional infliction of emotional distress claim, this cause of action cannot be allowed in circumvention of the unavailability of a tort claim for wrongful discharge or the contract rule against liability for discharge of an at-will employee.

Plaintiff's fourth cause of action is for breach of contract. Although he concedes in his complaint that his employment contract was of indefinite duration (inferentially recognizing that, were there no more, under traditional principles his employer might have discharged him at any time), he asserts that in all employment contracts the law implies an obligation on the part of the employer to deal with his employees fairly and in good faith and that a discharge in violation of that implied obligation exposes the employer to liability for breach of contract. Seeking then to apply this proposition to the present case, plaintiff argues in substance that he was required by the terms of his employment to disclose accounting improprieties and that defendant's discharge of him for having done so constituted a failure by the employer to act in good faith and thus a breach of the contract of employment.

No New York case upholding any such broad proposition is cited to us by plaintiff (or identified by our dissenting colleague), and we know of none. New York does recognize that in appropriate circumstances an obligation of good faith and fair dealing on the part of a party to a contract may be implied and, if implied will be enforced. In such instances the implied obligation is in aid and furtherance of other terms of the agreement of the parties. No obligation can be implied, however, which would be inconsistent with other terms of the contractual relationship. Thus, in the case now before us, plaintiff's employment was at will, a relationship in which the law accords the employer an unfettered right to terminate the employment at any time. In the context of such an employment it would be incongruous to say that an inference may be drawn that the employer impliedly agreed to a provision which would be destructive of his right of termination. The parties may by express agreement limit or restrict the employer's right of discharge, but to imply such a limitation from the existence of an unrestricted right would be internally inconsistent. In sum, under New York law as it now stands, absent a constitutionally impermissible purpose, a statutory proscription, or an express limitation in the individual contract of employment, an employer's right at any time to terminate an employment at will remains unimpaired.

Of course, if there were an express limitation on the employer's right of discharge it would be given effect even though the employment contract was of indefinite duration. Thus, in _Weiner v McGraw-Hill, Inc._, cited by plaintiff, we recently held that, on an appropriate evidentiary showing, a limitation on the employer's right to terminate an employment of indefinite duration might be imported from an express provision therefor found in the employer's handbook on personnel policies and procedures. Plaintiff's attempts on this appeal to bring himself within the beneficial scope of that holding must fail, however. There is here no evidence of any such express limitation. Although general references are to be found in his brief in our court to an employer's "manual", no citation is furnished to any provision therein pertinent to the employer's right to terminate his employment, and the alleged manual was not submitted with his affidavit in opposition to the motion to dismiss his complaint.

Accordingly, the fourth cause of action should have been dismissed for failure to state a cause of action.


#### MEYER, J. (dissenting in part).

The harshness of a rule which permits an employer to discharge with impunity a 30-year employee one day before his pension vests or for no other reason than that he filed a compensation claim, the bizarre origin of the termination-at-will rule,[^Murphy1] the change of economic and constitutional philosophy that has occurred since its adoption,[^Murphy2] the exclusion of a substantial segment of the working community from its effects through "just cause" limitations upon the right to fire resulting from collective bargaining, and the inconsistency of the rule not only with the common law of England and with earlier New York decisions but also with the law of most industrial countries of the world, have caused an outpouring of judicial and scholarly writings intended to ameliorate, if not abolish, the rule. I agree with the majority that we should not now adopt the tort remedies proposed in those writings, because such remedies are essentially grounded in public policy, the declaration of which is a function of both the Legislature and the courts, because the New York Legislature has not been reticent in the area, and because of the difficulty encountered by the courts adopting such remedies in articulating the exact nature of the public policy which will bring them into play.

I cannot, however, accept the majority's refusal to follow precedent decisional law recognizing an implied-in-law obligation on the part of the employer not to discharge an employee for doing that which the employment contract obligated him to do or to differentiate between that existing contract obligation and the public policy laden tort of abusive discharge. Plaintiff's complaint alleges that "defendant's internal regulations required that plaintiff report any deviation from proper accounting practice to defendant's top management" and that he was dismissed as a result of his doing just that. Because those allegations sufficiently state a cause of action for breach of contract not only under decisions of other States but as a matter of New York law as well, I dissent from the majority's affirmance of the dismissal of the fourth cause of action.

I do not gainsay that _Martin v New York Life Ins. Co._, however questionable its origin and continued existence, is the New York rule concerning employment contracts of unspecified duration. So in _Haines v City of New York_, we took pains to point out that unlike other contracts of unspecified duration, as to which the law will imply that the parties "intended performance to continue for a reasonable time", that rule "for compelling policy reasons has not been, and should not be, applied to contracts of employment". But the policy reasons behind refusing to read a durational term into employment contracts do not require reading out of such contracts the "implied covenant of fair dealing and good faith" which "is implicit in all contracts" and is "a contractual obligation of universal force which underlies all written agreements".

I refer not to the promise that each party will use reasonable efforts to carry out the contract purpose, which may be implied-in-fact from the contract negotiations to establish consideration though the writing be "imperfectly expressed" in that respect, but to the covenant implied by the law that the parties will not "frustrate the contracts into which they have entered" and that one party will "not intentionally and purposely do anything to prevent the other party from carrying out the agreement on his part".

Under this principle it was held in _Meyerhofer_ that by entering into a contract to purchase from plaintiff property which defendant knew plaintiff would have to buy at a foreclosure sale in order to convey, defendant impliedly agreed that she would do nothing to prevent him from acquiring the property at such sale and, having outbid him at the sale, was liable to him for the difference between the contract price and the price she paid to the referee in foreclosure. Indeed, more than 100 years ago we applied the principle to a broker's commission contract, though terminable at will, holding in _Sibbald v Bethlehem Iron Co._ that "Where no time for the continuance of the contract is fixed by its terms, either party is at liberty to terminate it at will _subject only to the ordinary requirements of good faith"_. And though a broker's employment is occasional rather than continuous, we have recognized the role of good faith even as it relates to continuous employment, saying in _Arentz v Morse Dry Dock & Repair Co._ with respect to a claimed contract of permanent employment of a general manager that "Plaintiff was not obliged to stay with the defendant for life, neither was defendant obliged to employ him beyond the time when _in good faith_ it had no further use for his services".

The principle, moreover, is espoused by the Restatement of Contracts, Second (§ 205), which flatly states that "Every contract imposes upon each party a duty of good faith and fair dealing in its performance and its enforcement," and which in Comment _e_ and the Reporter's Notes thereto indicates its application to the "abuse of a power to terminate the contract" including "an express power to terminate a contract at will". It is recognized as well in section 1-203 of the Uniform Commercial Code and by Williston, Contracts (3d ed, §§ 670, 1295), which tells us that: "Wherever, therefore, a contract cannot be carried out in the way in which it was obviously expected that it should be carried out without one party or the other performing some act not expressly promised by him, a promise to do that act must be implied." The same reasoning that reads into an output contract the requirement that the manufacturing plant continue to perform in good faith and into the contract of an employee hired to invent that the resulting patent belongs to the employer, though no express provision to such effect be contained in the contract, requires reading into the contract the present plaintiff alleges a provision that he will not be terminated for doing that which the parties have expressly contracted he shall do.[^Murphy7] To be borne in mind is the fact that we deal not with a contract which by its expressed term authorizes the employer to terminate without cause, but with one in which, because no durational term has been expressed, the law implies a right of termination. In the latter situation only the strongest of policy reasons can sustain reading the _implied_ right of termination as a limitation upon the _express_ obligation imposed upon the employee.

There is, moreover, no compelling policy reason to read the implied obligation of good faith out of contracts impliedly terminable at will. To do so belies the "universal force" of the good faith obligation which, as we have seen, the law reads into "all contracts." Nor can credence be given the _in terrorem_ suggestion that to limit terminable-at-will contracts by good faith will drive industry from New York. That is no more than speculation and hardly appears acceptable in the face of the recognition without apparent industrial exodus of the even more burdensome tort remedy for discharge of at-will employees by such industrial States as California, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. The more particularly is this so because collective bargaining "just cause" provisions, which impose a greater burden on employers than does a good faith limitation have not done so, and because employers can obtain a large measure of protection by expressly reserving in the employment contract the right to terminate without cause.

The fact that the Legislature has limited at-will discharge in the several ways listed in footnote 5 above but has not expressly established a breach of contract action for termination of at-will employment which violates the implied-in-law obligation of good faith provides no reason to await action by the Legislature. The at-will rule was created by the courts and can properly be changed by the courts but, more importantly, as demonstrated above, the rule has for at least a century been subject to the "universal force" of the good faith rule. The Legislature, therefore, had no reason before the present decision to believe that action on its part was required.

Nor ought we succumb to any "floodgates" argument. "This court has rejected as a ground for denying a cause of action that there will be a proliferation of claims. It suffices that if a cognizable wrong has been committed that there must be a remedy, whatever the burden on the courts". The argument is, moreover, specious. It is plaintiff's burden if he is to avoid summary judgment to come forward with admissible evidence that he was terminated because he reported, as required, a deviation from proper accounting practice and it will be his burden to establish that fact before the jury. And though the burden of going forward, once plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, will shift to defendant, it will remain the plaintiff's burden to convince the jury that he was fired for the reason he alleged, not the employer's burden to convince them that he had other good cause to fire the employee. True, the evidence presented by an employer in such a situation will normally be of other cause to fire, but there is no reason to believe that under proper instruction from the court as to burden of proof a jury cannot be trusted to determine the good faith issue thus presented as they now regularly do in all the other good faith situations presented to them.

It may well be that plaintiff's fourth cause of action will not survive a motion for summary judgment or, if it does, will not succeed before a jury. To dismiss it at this stage, on the pleadings alone, is, however, wholly inconsistent with the prior holdings of this and other courts with respect to the implied-in-law obligation of good faith. I therefore, cannot vote for doing so.

[^Murphy1]: (n.1 in dissenting opinion) _Martin v New York Life Ins. Co._, 148 N.Y. 117, accepted as correct the rule stated in section 136 of Wood, Master and Servant (2d ed) that "the fact that the compensation is measured at so much a day, month or year does not necessarily make such hiring a hiring for a day, month or year, but that in all such cases the contract may be put an end to by either party at any time, unless the time is fixed". Though later stated to have been "deliberately adopted, all the judges concurring, to settle the differences of opinion which had prevailed in the lower courts", _Martin's_ adoption of the rule may fairly be characterized as bizarre in light of (1) Wood's concession that "In England it is held that a general hiring, or a hiring by the terms of which no time is fixed, is a hiring by the year", (2) the contrary statement of the rule in \[previous N.Y. cases\], (3) the fact, documented in the Annotation at 11 ALR 469, 476, and in a number of the articles referred to in footnote 4 below, that Wood's rule was not supported by any of the cases cited by him, and (4) the logical inconsistency of a rule the ultimate statement of which is that "permanent employment means nothing more than that the employment is to continue indefinitely and until one or the other of the parties wishes for some good reason to sever the relation".

[^Murphy2]: (n.2 in dissenting opinion) The concept that a restriction upon an employer's right to terminate was a violation of due process has long since given way to decisions upholding the constitutionality not only of various labor acts but also of restrictions upon discharge for reasons of race, sex, age, political affiliation and the like.

[^Murphy7]: (n.7 in dissenting opinion) Ironically, the employer's implied absolute right to terminate at-will employment for any reason or for no reason had its origin in the necessity of according the _employer_ mutuality with the right of the _employee_ to quit his job at any time. Logically, of course, the same principle of mutuality requires that if, as plaintiff alleges and must prove in order to succeed, defendant's contract with him required him to report to defendant's top management any deviation from proper accounting practice, plaintiff's employment not be terminated because he did so.