### Myers v. Howmedica Osteonics Corp., No. CV 14-248-M-DLC. (D. Mont. March 30, 2016)

#### DANA L. CHRISTENSEN, Chief District Judge.

Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff Howmedica Osteonics Corp. d/b/a Stryker Orthopedics ("Stryker") filed a motion for judgment as a matter of law with regard to the wrongful discharge claim brought by Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant Jeremy R. Myers ("Myers"). For the reasons explained below, the Court grants Stryker's motion.

#### BACKGROUND

Stryker, a medical device and equipment manufacturer, terminated Myers on December 10, 2013, following an investigation into Myers's professional conduct. Myers had begun working for Stryker in 2005 as a sales representative, selling Stryker products to doctors throughout Montana and nearby states. In July, 2010, Stryker promoted Myers to the position of Sales Manager for Stryker's Northwest Branch. Shortly after accepting the promotion, Myers signed a contract including, among other provisions, confidentiality and non-competition obligations. Myers agreed to be bound by those obligations for a year following termination of his employment.

Myers acknowledged that he received and read Stryker's employee handbook and its code of conduct during his employment. Stryker's personnel documents prohibit workplace harassment and promote ethical behavior. The company's published policies also established that Stryker may terminate an employee for violating company policies.

Myers's sales territory performed well under his leadership, and he was rated as outstanding in his 2013 performance review. Toward the end of that year, however, his manager, Scott Curtis ("Curtis"), and human resources manager, Jenny Lavey ("Lavey"), became concerned about Myers's behavior. Following several customer and employee complaints, Curtis and Lavey conducted an investigation into Myers's professional conduct. Immediately following the investigation, and without discussing the matter with Myers, Stryker terminated Myers's employment.

In the summer of 2013, Myers advocated for the termination of Justin Auch ("Auch"), a salesperson within his region. Curtis followed Myers's advice and discharged Auch. Curtis was surprised by the volume and negativity of feedback he received from other employees and customers regarding Auch's termination. The complaints questioned Myers's fitness to manage a sales team and suggested that Myers's continued employment would threaten Stryker's relationships with employees and customers. One doctor removed all of his business from Stryker.

Upon fielding complaints about Myers, Curtis traveled from his workplace, Denver, Colorado, to Montana to speak with the customers and employees who worked closely with Myers. Over the course of several weeks, Curtis heard from many of Myers's subordinates that Myers managed them through intimidation, harassment, and demands for money and services. Stryker's Operations Manager told Curtis that she had personally witnessed Myers behave aggressively and unprofessionally with her team of employees and with others. Curtis viewed the behavior described as serious, unusual, and unacceptable.

Conversations with customers similarly concerned Curtis. He learned that Myers had been banned from a hospital for 30 days for failing to sign in at the front desk and that Myers had not disclosed the disciplinary measure. Several customers stated that they would remove all of their business from Stryker to avoid working directly with Myers. Another described Myers bullying a hospital CFO.

Curtis notified Lavey of his conversations with employees and customers and asked her to conduct an investigation. Over several days, Lavey interviewed employees who worked with Myers and documented those interviews. The individuals interviewed corroborated the information compiled by Curtis. Lavey determined—and Curtis agreed—that Myers's misconduct was so egregious and extensive that discharge was necessary. Curtis and Lavey recommended Myers's termination to their respective managers. On December 10, 2013, Curtis and Lavey met with Myers and notified him that he was being terminated and gave a general explanation of the reasons. After Myers's termination, Stryker rehired Auch.

In May, 2014—seven months before expiration of Myers's contractual obligations—Myers took a job with Zimmer, Inc. ("Zimmer"), which manufactures and sells products competitive to Stryker's within the same markets.

#### ANALYSIS

#### I. WRONGFUL DISCHARGE CLAIM

Myers brings a wrongful discharge claim under Montana's Wrongful Discharge from Employment Act ("WDEA"). Mont. Code Ann. §§ 39-2-901 to 39-2-915 (2015). The parties agree that Myers was not a probationary employee. Under the WDEA, an employer's discharge of a non-probationary employee is lawful if: (1) the employer did not retaliate against the employee for protected activities; (2) the employer had good cause to terminate the employee; and (3) the employer did not violate his own personnel policies. § 39-2-904. Myers does not claim that his discharge was retaliatory. Rather, he raises three alternative theories for wrongful discharge. First, he asserts that Stryker lacked good cause for his termination. Second, he argues that Stryker's purported good cause reason is a pretext and that the true reason for his discharge is unlawful. And third, he claims that even if Stryker can show good cause, Stryker violated the provisions of its own personnel policies when it terminated him.

##### B. Good Cause

Myers argues that Stryker did not have good cause to terminate him because Stryker did not adequately ground its decision in the facts, making his discharge unreasonable. The Court disagrees. The undisputed facts clearly establish that Stryker discharged Myers for acting unethically, unprofessionally, and in a manner likely to harm the company.

An employer's termination is wrongful if it was not for good cause. Mont. Code Ann. § 39-2-904(1)(b). "'Good cause' means reasonable job-related grounds for dismissal based on a failure to satisfactorily perform job duties, disruption of the employer's operation, or other legitimate business reason." § 39-2-903(5). A legitimate business reason is "neither false, whimsical, arbitrary or capricious, and it must have some logical relationship to the needs of the business." 

Under Montana law, a court may not substitute its judgment for an employer's discretion in employment matters: "it is inappropriate for courts to become involved in the day-to-day employment decisions of a business." An employer's discretion is greatest "where the employee occupies a 'sensitive' managerial position exercising 'broad discretion.'" Deference to an employer's business judgment is particularly great when the employer must place substantial trust in the employee's decision-making.

Myers was a managerial employee. Serving as Sales Manager for Stryker's Northwest Branch, Myers oversaw the work of eight sales representatives and associates operating within Montana and northern Wyoming. Myers reported directly to Curtis, who was based in Denver. Within Montana and northern Wyoming, Myers had extensive discretion over the day-to-day business of the regional team. Additionally, Myers served as a liaison between higher management and employees operating within the region. It was important for Stryker to trust Myers's leadership, and Stryker had significant discretion regarding Myers's continued employment.

Myers's termination was for good cause if it was not "false, whimsical, arbitrary or capricious" and had "some logical relationship to the needs of the business." The parties do not dispute the appropriateness of this standard, and they agree that Stryker's purported reasons for terminating Myers—harassment of employees and harm to customer relationships—meet its requirements. However, the parties disagree: (1) whether Stryker was mistaken as to Myers's conduct; and (2) whether any mistake is relevant if Stryker was indeed mistaken.

The Court first considers the undisputed facts. Unless Myers's pretext argument, addressed separately below, is successful, there is no dispute that Stryker terminated Myers for its good faith belief that Myers harassed coworkers and damaged relationships with customers. Stryker conducted an investigation before Myers was terminated. As part of the investigation, Curtis and Lavey spoke with Myers's coworkers and customers. Following the investigation, Curtis and Lavey were concerned about Myers behaving unprofessionally within the organization and about him damaging relationships with customers. In their interviews with Myers's subordinates, Curtis and Lavey heard stories about Myers pressuring others to provide services to him in exchange for Myers's performance of his regular job duties. Employees from other sales divisions reported that Stryker's customers were considering leaving Stryker because they were unhappy with Myers. Doctors reported significant wrongdoing. Additionally, Myers was banned from a hospital for 30 days, and Stryker was concerned about the example this ban set for other employees, even though the violation leading to the ban was not particularly egregious.

Myers does not dispute the above facts. Instead, he argues that Stryker was mistaken about his conduct. This argument is unavailing. Myers had the opportunity to seek positive evidence to raise a dispute, but he did not do so. He merely denied that the statements Curtis and Lavey attributed to his co-workers were truthful. He did not submit affidavits from his former co-workers or any other evidence aside from his bare assertions that the events described by the interviewees had not, in fact, occurred.

Further, even if every person with whom Curtis and Lavey had spoken was indeed mistaken about Myers's conduct, Stryker's trust in Myers was reasonably and irrevocably eroded. Myers was in a managerial position requiring the exercise of discretion. The Court cannot second-guess Stryker's decision to terminate Myers when there is no dispute that Stryker lost confidence in Myers after an extensive investigation performed in good faith.

Rather than create a factual dispute, Myers raises a legal argument to support his position. Myers relies nearly completely upon _Marcy v. Delta Airlines,_ in which the Ninth Circuit held that, under the WDEA, summary judgment for an employer is inappropriate when the plaintiff-employee introduces facts demonstrating that the employer's purported good cause reason was grounded in a mistake. In _Marcy,_ the employee introduced positive evidence to show that her former employer was mistaken that she had knowingly sought payment for hours unworked. The employer's investigation into the misconduct was minimal. 

In response to Myers's citation to _Marcy,_ Stryker relies principally on _Sullivan v. Continental Construction of Montana, LLC_, 299 P.3d 832 (Mont. 2013). In _Sullivan,_ the Montana Supreme Court affirmed summary judgment for the employer when it terminated an employee based solely on its internal investigation into allegations of misconduct. The employer interviewed the plaintiff's coworkers, who reported that the plaintiff, a managerial employee, regularly demeaned and derogated his subordinates. The employee could not raise a genuine issue of material fact by introducing evidence suggesting that some coworkers did not find his actions inappropriate. The court distinguished _Marcy,_ determining that an employee must offer specific positive evidence to argue mistake. By offering evidence suggesting that he was a valuable employee who did not deserve termination, the employee in _Sullivan_ did not successfully counter the "substantial conflicting evidence" uncovered by the employer in its investigation. 

The controversy here is analogous to that presented in _Sullivan._ Myers's mere assertion that Stryker is mistaken does not create a factual dispute. To overcome summary judgment, Myers would need to offer evidence that Stryker's investigation was inadequate or specific positive evidence showing the presence of mistake. Myers has not met that burden. Summary judgment is appropriate for Stryker because the undisputed facts show that Stryker had good cause to terminate Myers for its good faith belief that Myers harassed coworkers and threatened valuable relationships with customers.

##### C. Pretext

Myers argues that even if Stryker can show good cause, a factual dispute exists regarding whether Stryker's purported reason for the termination is a mere pretext. Myers asserts that Stryker terminated Myers as a scapegoat for the company's decision to terminate Auch. In response, Stryker raises two arguments: (1) that, even if Myers were correct in arguing pretext, Stryker would still have good cause to terminate Myers for suggesting Auch's termination; and (2) that Myers has presented only speculation in support of his claim of pretext. No genuine dispute of material fact exists on the question of pretext, and Stryker is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

To defeat summary judgment on the issue of pretext, "the employee 'must prove that the given reason for the discharge is a pretext and not the honest reason for the discharge.'" An employee fails to meet his burden when he does not present some evidence in the record substantiating his claim of pretext; "mere denial or speculation will not suffice." 

The undisputed facts demonstrate that Myers advocated for Auch's termination. Shortly after Auch's termination, two physicians contacted Curtis, frustrated with the decision; one withdrew all business from Stryker because of Auch's termination. Additionally, Myers's colleagues within separate divisions of Stryker contacted Curtis expressing concern about Auch's discharge and Myers's management style. In response to the negative feedback, Curtis sought to rehire Auch, but Myers refused. After Stryker discharged Myers, the company hired Auch again.

Although Auch's termination factored into Myers's discharge, Myers cannot point to facts in the record supporting his claim that Stryker unfairly turned him into a scapegoat for Auch's termination. Stryker has introduced evidence showing that Auch's termination triggered questions about Myers's suitability for employment and that it then conducted an investigation resulting in Myers's termination. Myers cannot produce evidence supporting his claim that Stryker did not base its decision to terminate his employment on both Myers's advice regarding Auch and on the results of the investigation. Instead, Myers relies solely on "mere speculation." 

Additionally, Myers has not adequately supported his argument that a pretextual discharge would have violated the WDEA. Myers asserts that he fully informed Curtis about the potential repercussions of Auch's termination in an attempt to minimize his responsibility. However, Myers is unable to dispute that Stryker's upper management was keenly dependent on his advice regarding his sales team because he was a regional manager with a direct connection to his sales team. Additionally, Myers can point to no evidence refuting Stryker's evidence that the discharge of Auch left Curtis feeling deceived and misguided by Myers. In the absence of such evidence, Myers has failed to substantiate his claim that Stryker discharged him for an improper purpose.

Thus, even if Stryker did terminate Myers for advocating for Auch's termination, Myers's claim of pretext would nonetheless fail because Stryker had a "legitimate business reason" to discharge Myers for precisely that reason. Myers's actions threatened customer relationships and made Myers's coworkers uncomfortable. As a result of Myers's conduct, Stryker lost trust in him, and the company had the discretion to terminate Myers as a result. 

##### D. Compliance with Company Policy

Myers claims that, even if Stryker had good cause to terminate him, the discharge was wrongful because it was in violation of Stryker's own personnel policies. Stryker moved for summary judgment on this theory of wrongful discharge, and Myers did not respond to defend his claim. Summary judgment is appropriate for Stryker on this theory.

Under Montana law, a discharge is wrongful if an employer "violated express provisions of its own written personnel policy." § 39-2-904(c). Stryker's written personnel policies clearly outlined Stryker's discretionary authority to terminate employees for violations of company rules or policies. Stryker determined, following its investigation, that Myers violated the company's code of conduct and employee handbook, both of which promote ethical conduct and prohibit harassment and other unprofessional behavior. Under Stryker's written policies, of which he was informed, Myers was not entitled to an interview before termination, as he alleged. Stryker fully complied with its written policies.