### Retaliatory Employment Discrimination, N.C.G.S. § 95-240 et seq.
<div class="legal-code">


#### § 95-240 Definitions

The following definitions apply in this Article:

(1) “Person” means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, business trust, legal representative, the State, a city, town, county, municipality, local agency, or other entity of government.

(2) “Retaliatory action” means the discharge, suspension, demotion, retaliatory relocation of an employee, or other adverse employment action taken against an employee in the terms, conditions, privileges, and benefits of employment.


#### § 95-241

(a) No person shall discriminate or take any retaliatory action against an employee because the employee in good faith does or threatens to do any of the following:

> (1) File a claim or complaint, initiate any inquiry, investigation, inspection, proceeding or other action, or testify or provide information to any person with respect to any of the following:
> 
> > a. Chapter 97 of the General Statutes.
> > 
> > b. Article 2A or Article 16 of this Chapter.
> > 
> > c. Article 2A of Chapter 74 of the General Statutes.
> > 
> > d. G.S. 95-28.1.
> > 
> > e. Article 16 of Chapter 127A of the General Statutes.
> > 
> > f. G.S. 95-28.1A.
> > 
> > g. Article 52 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes.
> > 
> > h. Article 5F of Chapter 90 of the General Statutes.
> 
> (2) Cause any of the activities listed in subdivision (1) of this subsection to be initiated on an employee's behalf.
> 
> (3) Exercise any right on behalf of the employee or any other employee afforded by Article 2A or Article 16 of this Chapter, by Article 2A of Chapter 74 of the General Statutes, or by Article 52 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes.
> 
> (4) Comply with the provisions of Article 27 of Chapter 7B of the General Statutes.
> 
> (5) Exercise rights under Chapter 50B. Actions brought under this subdivision shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 50B-5.5.

(b) It shall not be a violation of this Article for a person to discharge or take any other unfavorable action with respect to an employee who has engaged in protected activity as set forth under this Article if the person proves by the greater weight of the evidence that it would have taken the same unfavorable action in the absence of the protected activity of the employee.

</div>

--- 

#### Note

N.C.G.S. § 95-241 applies to discrimination or retaliation based on employee conduct under certain specified North Carolina statutes: 

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 97: Workers' Compensation Act

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 95, Art. 2A: Wage & Hour Act

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 95, Art. 16: Occupational Safety & Health Act
 
- N.C.G.S. Chap. 74, Art. 2A: Mine Safety & Health Act

- N.C.G.S. 95-28.1:  Discrimination Against Any Person Possessing Sickle Cell Trait or Hemoglobin C Trait Prohibited

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 127A, Art. 16: National Guard Reemployment Rights 

- N.C.G.S. 95-28.1A:  Discrimination Against Persons Based on Genetic Testing or Genetic Information Prohibited

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 143, Art. 52: Pesticide Board 

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 90, Art. 5F: Control of Potential Drug Paraphernalia Products

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 7B, Art. 27: Authority over Parents of Juveniles Adjudicated Delinquent or Undisciplined

- N.C.G.S. Chap. 50B: Domestic Violence

