### Amador v. Tan, 855 S.W.2d 131 (Tex. App. 1993)

#### Barajas, J.

This is an appeal from the dismissal of a wrongful termination case. Beatrice Amador, Appellant, alleged she was terminated from her employment due to her discussion of the issue of abortion, among other theories, to which Ian Frederick Tan and General Mills, Inc., Appellees, filed special exceptions. The court sustained Appellees' special exceptions, and upon Appellant's failure to amend her pleadings, dismissed the case. In her sole point of error, Appellant complains the trial court erred in holding that she failed to state a cause of action on any of her four theories. We affirm the judgment of the trial court.

#### I. Summary of the Evidence 

The Appellant, Beatrice Amador, was employed as a waitress at the Red Lobster Restaurant in El Paso, Texas from August 31, 1981 to March 30, 1990. During that period of time, Appellee, Ian Frederick Tan ("Tan"), was the manager of the restaurant. The record in the instant case shows that it is uncontroverted that Appellant's status with Red Lobster Restaurant was nothing more than an at-will employee, employed without the benefit of a written contract.

Appellant alleges that she was terminated in retaliation for actions taken by her relating to two "on-the-job" incidents. As a result of the first incident, Appellant sought the assistance of the corporate headquarters of Appellee, General Mills, Inc. This first action by Appellant required her to go "over the head" of Tan, and resulted in a subsequent investigation. Appellant alleges that this investigation by corporate headquarters formed the basis for Tan's dislike of her and his subsequent attempts to devise ways to terminate her from her employment.

The second incident involved Tan and another waitress employed by Red Lobster whom Appellant had befriended in 1985. The record shows that Appellant and the other waitress shared close personal confidences and in June of 1989, the other waitress informed Appellant that she had engaged in a sexual relationship with Tan, and as a result, had become pregnant with his child. Appellant contends that despite Tan's pressures to the contrary, she repeatedly counseled the waitress not to have an abortion. Appellant alleges that this advice to the other waitress further intensified Tan's animosity toward her, and was a contributing factor in her eventual termination from employment.

Appellant brought claims for the public policy tort of suppression of an employee's discussion of the issue of abortion, breach of contract, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Tan and General Mills, Inc. filed special exceptions, excepting in part, to Appellant's failure to state a cause of action. The trial court found that Plaintiff's First Amended Original Petition failed to state causes of action upon which relief could be granted. When Appellant failed to amend her pleadings, the trial court sustained Appellees special exceptions and dismissed her causes of action.

#### II. Discussion

In her sole point of error, Appellant urges it was error for the court to find that she failed to state a cause of action on any of her four alleged theories.

##### B. Public Policy Tort of Suppression of an Employee's Discussion of the Issue of Abortion and Breach of Contract

Appellant alleged that her termination from employment was in retaliation for her actions in counseling a fellow waitress, who was pregnant with the manager's child, not to have an abortion and further in retaliation for complaining to her manager's corporate superiors. Appellant argues that the termination by Appellees amounted to the unlawful suppression of her discussion regarding the issue of abortion as well as a breach of an implied promise not to retaliate.

It is well established in Texas, that employment for an indefinite period is terminable at will. The Supreme Court has carved out only one exception to the general rule allowing a cause action for wrongful termination when the employee has been discharged for the sole reason that the employee has refused to perform an illegal act.  Numerous other restrictions and exceptions to at-will doctrine have been created by the legislature.

We have reviewed Appellant's pleadings and find that she has wholly failed to plead any of the recognized exceptions to the general rule of at-will employment. To the contrary, Appellant seeks to have this Court create additional exceptions and establish a "public policy tort" of suppression of an employee's discussion of the issue of abortion, as well as a cause of action for breach of an implied promise not to retaliate against her for reporting her manager to his superiors. In _Winters,_ on facts far more compelling than those found in the instant case, the [Texas] Supreme Court declined to recognize "a cause of action for private employees who are discharged for reporting illegal activities." We elect to follow the reasoning of _Winters,_ and find that there is no recognized cause of action in Texas for a private, at-will employee who has been terminated as a result of his or her discussions regarding the issue of abortion. _See_ _Brunner v. Al Attar,_ 786 S.W.2d 784, 786 (Tex.App. 1990) (refusal to create an exception to at-will doctrine where employee was terminated upon her refusal to quit her volunteer work with the AIDS Foundation). Likewise, we find there is no recognized cognizable claim under Texas law which would confer a cause of action upon a private, at-will employee who has been terminated for breach of an implied promise not to retaliate for having reported his or her manager to superiors. Accordingly, we find that under current Texas law, Appellant has failed to state a cause of action for violation of the "public policy tort" as described above, or for breach of contract.