### Clayton v. Delmarva Community Services, Inc., 447 F.Supp.3d 404 (D. Md. 2020)

#### Richard D. Bennet, United States District Judge.

Plaintiffs Sharon Clayton, Vivian Thomas, Linda Carr, Consowillo Travers, and Jamez Justice (collectively, "Plaintiffs") have brought this action against Defendants Delmarva Community Services, Inc. and Santo Grande (collectively, "Defendants"), alleging violations of the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 203, _et seq._ ("FLSA"). Presently pending are the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment. 

#### BACKGROUND

Defendant Delmarva Community Services, Inc. ("Delmarva") is a non-profit organization that provides services to people with developmental disabilities and other diagnoses, people in poverty, and senior citizens in the States of Maryland and Delaware. Defendant Santo Grande ("Grande") has served as the President and Chief Executive Officer of Delmarva for approximately the last ten years. Delmarva's services include, but are not limited to, providing day services, community transportation, vocational services, poverty programs, and residential services. 

One of the residential services Delmarva provides is the Developmental Disabilities Program, which serves elderly people and people with disabilities in residential homes. Delmarva began this program in or about 1979 or 1980 in coordination with the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration, a state agency that provided Delmarva with funding. One of the components of this program was the creation of Community Living Assistant positions with a sleep staff shift. Based on the guidance and funding provided by the State of Maryland, sleep staff were not compensated during the time they spent sleeping overnight in Delmarva's residential homes. This was in compliance with the program established by the Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration.

Plaintiffs Sharon Clayton ("Clayton"), Vivian Thomas ("Thomas"), Linda Carr ("Carr"), Consowillo Travers ("Travers"), and Jamez Justice ("Justice") were all previously employed as Community Living Assistants in Delmarva's Developmental Disabilities Program. 

As Community Living Assistants, Plaintiffs helped residents live an independent lifestyle in Delmarva's residential homes, assisting with individual care, supervision, daily living activities, and general safety of the residents. Plaintiffs also served as "sleep staff," staying overnight with Delmarva residents one week on and one week off, every other Thursday to Thursday in varying residential homes. Typically, Plaintiffs' work schedules were as follows:

Plaintiffs all had some amount of down time while on the clock, during which time they did not have to complete any tasks and were able to watch television, use social media, make personal telephone calls, play games, read, or just relax. For example, Plaintiff Clayton spent much of her shift watching television, sending text messages, or using social media. Plaintiff Thomas engaged in personal activities during her working hours, such as making telephone calls, watching television, and using social media. Plaintiff Carr watched television, read, and played games on her phone. Plaintiff Travers also read during her down time. Plaintiff Justice watched television, relaxed, or read magazines and books in his down time. The time the Plaintiffs clocked out at the end of each workday until they clocked back in the next morning was time designated for sleep or other personal pursuits. 

Plaintiffs' "workweek" began on Monday and ended on Sunday. Plaintiffs clocked in and out of each work shift using Delmarva's "e-time system," whereby they would use the Delmarva residence's telephone to dial a given number and punch in their personal code. When Plaintiffs were unable to clock in or out, or if they forgot to do so, they would contact their supervisor, Angela Major-Hill, who would ensure that Plaintiffs were properly compensated for time that was not recorded by the e-time system. 

When Plaintiffs "clocked out" at night, they slept at the Delmarva residence and were not permitted to leave. During this "sleep time," Plaintiffs either slept, watched television, read, or engaged in other personal activities. If they were awakened by a resident during this time, they were instructed to clock back in while attending to the situation in order to be paid for the time spent working.Plaintiffs were occasionally awakened to assist residents during the night.

The Delmarva residences where Plaintiffs worked were typically single-family homes. Plaintiffs slept alone in rooms that were used by other sleep staff members during their off-duty weeks. Plaintiffs were not permitted to leave their belongings at the residences during their off-duty weeks.

While Plaintiffs had varying sleeping arrangements at the Delmarva residences, they all had their own rooms. All of the Plaintiffs' sleeping arrangements included a bed and a lamp or lighting, and some included a television, closet, chair, and additional furniture. All of the homes had at least one bathroom, a kitchen, and a living space. Plaintiffs were not permitted to have guests for periods longer than ten minutes. 

At some of the residences, Plaintiffs were not provided with dressers or closets to keep their belongings. At one of Plaintiff Thomas's assigned residences, she slept in a room off the kitchen with a transparent sliding door, through which the residents had to travel to reach their bedrooms. At another residence, Plaintiff Thomas slept in an open room without a door separating it from the kitchen.

Defendants affixed the required Fair Labor Standards Act and Maryland Wage and Hour Law postings at their headquarters in Cambridge, Maryland, but not in any of the residences to which Plaintiffs were assigned. Plaintiffs all acknowledged that they saw the postings at Defendants' headquarters, just beyond the front desk in the lobby of the headquarters. When Plaintiffs accepted their positions with Delmarva, they were informed of the job's requirements, the schedule, their non-exempt employee status, the pay structure, _and the fact that they would not be paid for their sleep time._ 

It is undisputed that Plaintiffs were not compensated for the time they spent sleeping overnight in Delmarva's residences. It is also undisputed that the parties did not execute a written agreement excluding the time Plaintiffs were required to remain in Delmarva's residences overnight from Plaintiffs' compensable time. Delmarva's employee handbook also does not contain any written statement about their sleep time policy, but it does explain that some schedules and shifts include "7 Days On/7 Days Off (with a sleep shift)." 


#### ANALYSIS

Plaintiffs seek compensation for the "sleep time" they spent at the Delmarva residences in between their on-duty work hours. Defendants assert that Plaintiffs' time spent sleeping is not compensable under the FLSA. The undisputed record before this Court reveals that summary judgment is warranted on all of Plaintiffs' claims in favor of the Defendants because Plaintiffs' "sleep time" was not compensable work as a matter of law.


#### II. Plaintiffs' FLSA Claim Fails as a Matter of Law.

Under the FLSA, employers must compensate employees for all of their hours worked, at a rate that is not less than the federal minimum wage rate. 29 U.S.C. § 206. In addition, the FLSA provides that employers must compensate employees "at a rate not less than one and one-half times" the employee's regular hourly rate for any time the employee is required to work in excess of a 40-hour workweek. 29 U.S.C. § 207.

The parties agree that Plaintiffs were not compensated for their time spent sleeping. The parties also agree that Plaintiffs accepted their jobs with the knowledge that they would not be paid for sleep time, despite the absence of a formal written agreement to this effect. There are no genuine issues of disputed facts in this matter. There is simply the legal question before this Court: whether the Plaintiffs are entitled to compensation for their sleep time.

To determine whether this time is considered working time under the FLSA, the United States Supreme Court has explained that employees must be compensated if they are "engaged to wait," but an employer is not required to pay an employee who is merely "waiting to be engaged." _Skidmore v. Swift & Co._, 323 U.S. 134 (1944). The United States Department of Labor ("DOL") has implemented regulations to determine whether time spent by employees is compensable as working time. _See_ [29 C.F.R. § 785](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/part-785/subpart-C). Specifically, the DOL implemented separate regulations regarding "waiting time" under 29 C.F.R. §§ 785.14-785.17 and "sleeping time and certain other activities" under 29 C.F.R. §§ 785.20-785.23.

Under 29 C.F.R. § 785.14, "waiting time" is compensable if it is time spent "engaged to wait." This determination "depends upon particular circumstances," such as the "scrutiny and construction of the agreements between particular parties, appraisal of their practical construction of the working agreement by conduct, consideration of the nature of the service, and its relation to the waiting time, and all of the circumstances." 29 C.F.R. § 785.14.

Under 29 C.F.R. § 785.23, "an employee who resides on his employer's premises on a permanent basis or for extended periods of time is not considered as working all the time he is on the premises." Accordingly, an employer need not compensate an employee for time when an employee "may engage in normal private pursuits and thus have enough time for eating, sleeping, entertaining, and other periods of complete freedom from all duties when he may leave the premises for purposes of his own." 29 C.F.R. § 785.23. When an employee resides on the employer's premises, there is a presumption that he or she is not working the entire time on the premises. Further, "any reasonable agreement of the parties which takes into consideration all of the pertinent facts will be accepted." 29 C.F.R. § 785.23. "Ultimately, an agreement reached pursuant to section 785.23 is binding if it is reasonable in light of 'all of the pertinent facts' of the employment relationship." 

A court's analysis of time under _Skidmore_ and 29 C.F.R. § 785.14 is a separate and distinct inquiry of sleep time under 29 C.F.R. § 785.23.

Defendants urge the Court to find that Plaintiffs' sleep time was not compensable under both the "waiting time" analysis of 29 C.F.R. § 785.14 and the "sleeping time" analysis of 29 C.F.R. § 785.23. This Court is persuaded that Plaintiffs' time spent sleeping was not compensable under 29 C.F.R. § 785.14 and the _Skidmore_ test. However, Defendants' arguments under 29 C.F.R. § 785.23 raise more complicated questions of law that need not be resolved here because summary judgment is appropriate in Defendants' favor for the separate and distinct basis that Plaintiffs' sleep time was time spent "waiting to be engaged" pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 785.14 and _Skidmore._

##### A. Plaintiffs' sleep time is not compensable because it was time spent waiting to be engaged.

To determine if on-call time is compensable under the FLSA, the critical question is whether "the time is spent predominantly for the employer's benefit or the employee's." Employees must be compensated if they are "engaged to wait," but an employer is not required to pay an employee who is merely "waiting to be engaged." 

To make this determination, courts examine several factors, including: the agreement of the parties, the nature and frequency of the services provided in relation to the time spent waiting, where the plaintiff is waiting, whether the employee may carry a beeper or leave home, the employee's ability to switch on-call shifts, and whether the employee actually engaged in personal activities during on-call time. _See_ 29 C.F.R. § 785.14. "The test is not whether the employee has substantially the same flexibility or freedom she would have if not on call." Rather, the relevant inquiry is "whether employees may actually engage in personal activities during on call shifts." This issue may be answered as a matter of law, or if the facts are unclear, may be answered at trial.

This Court is satisfied that this issue may be resolved as a matter of law because Plaintiffs' time sleeping was clearly time spent "waiting to be engaged." The undisputed record in this case shows that when Plaintiffs clocked out at night, they remained at the Delmarva residences and either slept, watched television, read, or engaged in other personal activities. If they were awakened by a resident during this time, they were instructed to clock back in while attending to the situation in order to be paid for the time spent working. 

Plaintiffs assert that they were engaged to wait because they did not have complete freedom to leave and would be terminated if they did leave. However, as explained above, the relevant inquiry is not whether Plaintiffs had the freedom to leave, but whether they had the freedom to engage in personal activities during this time. Indeed, the Fourth Circuit has concluded that eating, sleeping, and watching television at night are just the types of personal activities that constitute "uninterrupted personal pursuits." In _Myers,_ the Fourth Circuit found that "Caretakers" who were required to live at a park 24 hours per day to respond to infrequent emergencies were not entitled to compensation for such "uninterrupted personal pursuits." The Court further noted that there was "no indication that interruptions of private pursuits were frequent enough to render such time work time, that is, time spent predominantly for the benefit of the employer."

In this case, all five Plaintiffs likewise testified that they were only infrequently awakened to assist residents during the night. Plaintiff Thomas testified that "it didn't happen often." Plaintiff Carr also testified that she did not always clock in when she was awakened because she "didn't see the use to clock in for 10 minutes." Such infrequent disruption does not create a genuine dispute of fact as to whether Plaintiffs should be compensated for this time. This Court has previously granted summary judgment in favor of the employer when the employee had to reside and remain on an island but "was not so restricted that she could not use her on-call time for personal activities."

In addition, while the Plaintiffs assert that their sleeping arrangements were less than satisfactory, it is undisputed that Plaintiffs all had their own private rooms at the Delmarva residences, with a bed, lighting, and sometimes a television, closet, chair, and additional furniture. In addition, all of the homes had at least one bathroom, a kitchen, and a living space. 

The fact that, at some of the homes, Plaintiffs did not have dressers or closets to store their belongings or that Plaintiff Justice slept on a sofa instead of a bed for a 6-month period does not raise a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether this time was spent waiting to be engaged. In fact, 29 C.F.R. § 785.14 makes no mention of "adequate" sleeping facilities. Rather, this language comes from 29 C.F.R. § 785.22, which Plaintiffs do not assert in this case.

Moreover, all of the Plaintiffs testified that, even during their working hours, they often had down time to watch television, use social media, make personal telephone calls, play games, read, or just relax. In addition, Plaintiffs Thomas and Carr both testified that the homes contained all of the furnishings and amenities one would find in a private house. Considering all of the circumstances and nature of the employment agreement, which Plaintiffs acknowledged did not compensate them for their time spent sleeping, the Court finds that, as a matter of law, Plaintiffs' overnight time was time during which they were waiting to be engaged, time that was not compensable under the FLSA. Accordingly, summary judgment on Plaintiffs' FLSA claim is appropriate in favor of the Defendants.

##### B. The Court need not apply 29 C.F.R. § 785.23.

As the party seeking the benefit of Section 785.23, Defendants bear the burden of establishing its application and that the employment agreement with Plaintiffs was reasonable. Plaintiffs argue that Defendants have failed to meet all of the requirements of 29 C.F.R. § 785.23 because Plaintiffs did not reside in Delmarva's residences for an extended period of time. Plaintiffs specifically contend that Defendants failed to provide them with adequate sleeping quarters and did not provide them with periods of complete freedom. However, the record shows that the Plaintiffs and Defendants had a reasonable employment agreement under which Plaintiffs resided at Delmarva residences for one week at a time, Plaintiffs were provided adequate sleeping accommodations and periods of complete freedom, and Plaintiffs and Defendants agreed that sleep time would not be compensated.

Plaintiffs contend that they did not reside at Delmarva's residences for an extended period of time because "they did not remain on Delmarva's premises for five consecutive nights in a single workweek." While the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has not specifically addressed what constitutes "extended periods of time" under 29 C.F.R. § 785.23, there is a split of authority among other circuits. 

In _Beaston,_ the employees worked at a residential school for seven-day shifts that began at 3:00 p.m. on a Friday and ended at 8:30 a.m. the following Friday. The Third Circuit affirmed the District Court's finding that because the employees "spend seven consecutive days and nights on campus, they reside there for an extended period of time." Under this interpretation, Plaintiffs in this case would meet the "extended period of time" requirement because they also spent seven consecutive nights in Delmarva's residences. 

In _Giguere,_ the plaintiffs similarly worked seven days on, seven days off from Thursday through Thursday, while their employer's workweek was Sunday through Sunday. However, the First Circuit affirmed the District Court's finding that the employer had _not_ met the "extended periods of time" requirement under 29 C.F.R. § 785.23 based on a 1988 Department of Labor Enforcement Policy ("1988 DOL Policy"). The 1988 DOL Policy "stated that an employee meets the extended-periods-of-time standard when ... he 'resides on the premises for a period of at least 120 hours in a workweek,'" and "defined workweek' as 'seven consecutive 24-hour periods,' citing 29 C.F.R. § 778.105 ... which provides that ... once the employer has established when the workweek begins, the workweek's span 'remains fixed regardless of the schedule of hours worked by the employee.'" The Court explained that because the employer had established a workweek of Sunday to Sunday, and the employees worked Thursday to Thursday, then the employees could not be found to have resided on the employers' premises for "extended periods of time," as contemplated by 29 C.F.R. § 785.23.

Under the First Circuit's interpretation of the regulation, Plaintiffs in this case would not have resided on the Defendants' premises for an extended period of time, or at least 120 hours in the employer's workweek, because the Defendants' workweek was defined as Monday through Sunday, and Plaintiffs' sleep shifts were Thursday through Thursday. 

This Court is not persuaded that the First Circuit's understanding of "extended periods of time" based on the employer's workweek is the correct interpretation. While the First Circuit noted that the 1988 DOL Policy has not been superseded and is still used by the DOL, there is additional guidance by the DOL that suggests that "extended periods of time" is not defined by the employer's workweek under 29 C.F.R. § 778.105. For example, in a 2014 Opinion Letter, the DOL defined "extended periods of time" as "to work and sleep there for five days a week (120 hours or more) or five consecutive days or nights (regardless of the total number of hours)," without reference to the employer's workweek or 29 C.F.R. § 778.105. Similarly, in a 2016 DOL Field Assistance Bulletin, "extended periods of time" was defined as "working and sleeping there for five days a week (120 hours or more) or five consecutive days or nights (regardless of the total number of hours)," without reference to an employer's workweek or 29 C.F.R. § 778.105. This varying guidance shows that the DOL has not clearly established what constitutes the requisite period of time to determine whether employees reside on their employer's premises for "extended periods of time." Consequently, this Court is not inclined to adopt the First Circuit's understanding without more definitive guidance from the DOL or the Fourth Circuit.

In any event, the circuit split on this issue is not dispositive here in light of the separate and independent basis for this Court's decision. Accordingly, because this Court found that Plaintiffs' time spent sleeping is not compensable on a separate basis, this Court need not resolve whether Plaintiffs resided on Defendants' premises for "extended periods of time" as required by 29 C.F.R. § 785.23.


[^Clayton4]: (n.4 in opinion) There are two additional regulations pertaining to sleep time, 29 C.F.R. § 785.21 and 29 C.F.R. § 785.22, which the parties do not assert in this case. Under 29 C.F.R. § 785.21, employees on duty for less than 24 hours must be compensated for their time spent sleeping. Under 29 C.F.R. § 785.22, employees who work 24 hours or more may agree with their employers to exclude no more than eight hours of sleep from their hours worked.
