### Garcia v. Frog Island Seafood, Inc., 644 F.Supp.2d 696 (E.D.N.C. 2009)

#### JAMES C. FOX, Senior District Judge.

#### II. STATEMENT OF FACTS

This lawsuit arises from Defendants' alleged underpayment of wages and record-keeping violations during Plaintiffs' employment with Defendants. Plaintiffs are citizens of Mexico who were admitted as temporary foreign workers under the H-2B provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act, to work in Defendants' seafood processing plant as "crab pickers." During 2004-2006, Defendants sought permission to bring Mexican nationals to work in their seafood processing plant by filing annually an Application for Alien Employment Certification ("Clearance Orders") with the United States DOL. Each Clearance Order set forth the number of workers requested by Defendants, the period of employment, the type of work and rate of pay being offered by Defendants. The DOL approved the terms of work described in Defendants' Clearance Orders, and granted their request for H-2B visas to allow Plaintiffs to fill the jobs described in those orders.

Each of the plaintiffs paid his or her own transportation, visa, passport and border crossing costs-expenses not reimbursed by Defendants. Defendants required Plaintiffs to use knives while performing certain tasks in the course of Plaintiffs' employment with Defendants. Defendants provided Plaintiffs with the knives at no cost at the beginning of the season; however, Plaintiffs were advised that replacement knives would be deducted from their wages. Such deductions were made without obtaining Plaintiffs' written authorizations. While employed by Defendants, Plaintiffs rented housing provided by Defendant Frog Island Seafood ("FIS"). Defendant FIS did not register the housing with the NCDOL prior to furnishing it to Plaintiffs. Due to the unpredictability of crab supply, Plaintiffs worked variable hours each week.

Plaintiffs assert an FLSA claim with a proposed opt-in plaintiff class under 29 U.S.C. § 216(b), alleging violations of the federal minimum wage provision by (1) not reimbursing Plaintiffs for transportation, passport, visa and border crossing fees in the first workweek, which effectively brought Plaintiffs' first week's wages below the federal minimum wage;[^Garcia1] (2) deducting the costs of replacement knives from Plaintiffs' pay and requiring Plaintiffs to purchase items required for work, to the extent these deductions and purchases reduced wages below the minimum wage; and (3) charging rent for housing that (a) exceeded the actual cost and included a profit to Defendants, (b) resulted in a reduction of the wages paid to Plaintiffs to an amount or rate below the minimum wage; and (c) violated the North Carolina Migrant Housing Act ("NCMHA").

[^Garcia1]: 
  {-} The portions of the opinion addressing this issue are omitted. 


#### III. CROSS MOTIONS FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT

##### A. Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment

##### 2. Wage deductions for boots and replacement knives

Plaintiffs allege that their boot expenses, a required work item, operated as _de facto_ wage deductions and violated the FLSA to the extent these deductions reduced Plaintiffs' wages below the minimum wage and promised wage, respectively, in any given workweek. Plaintiffs contend further that Defendants are liable under (1) the FLSA for actual deductions of the cost of replacement knives from Plaintiffs' wages to the extent those deductions reduced wages below the minimum wage; and (2) the NCWHA for failing to obtain Plaintiffs' written authorizations prior to deducting the costs of replacement knives from Plaintiffs' wages.

##### a. FLSA

##### i. Boots

If an employer requires an employee to purchase an item which is "specifically required for the performance of the employer's particular work, there would be a violation of the \[FLSA\] in any workweek when the cost of such \[item\] purchased by the employee cuts into the minimum ... wages required to be paid him under the \[FLSA\]." 29 C.F.R. § 531.35; _see also_ 29 C.F.R. § 531.32(c) (explaining the cost to the employer of purchasing items, such as uniforms, are primarily for the benefit or convenience of the employer and may not therefore be included in computing wages). In this case, Defendants acknowledge that Plaintiffs were required to wear rubber boots, which Plaintiffs bore the responsibility of purchasing. However, Defendants contend Plaintiffs failed to establish that "any such deductions ever reduced their wages below minimum wage." Indeed, Plaintiffs supply no evidence indicating that boot expenses reduced Plaintiffs' wages below the minimum wage in contravention of the FLSA. In fact, Plaintiffs state only that their purchase of boots operated as _de facto_ deductions.Accordingly, as to reimbursement for the cost of boots, Plaintiffs motion for partial summary judgment is DENIED.

##### ii. Knives

Generally, the costs an employer incurs purchasing and providing tools of trade, such as the knives in this case, may not be included in computing wages, since such items are "primarily for the benefit or convenience of the employer...." 29 C.F.R. § 531.32(c). Nevertheless, deductions for the costs of such items "may ... be made ... if the employee ... received the required minimum wages in cash free and clear; but to the extent they reduce the wages of the employee in any such workweek below the minimum required by the \[FLSA\], they are illegal." 29 C.F.R. § 531.36(b). Defendants provided Plaintiffs with knives at no cost at the beginning of the season; however, Plaintiffs were advised that replacement knives would be deducted from their wages. Defendants admit requiring Plaintiffs to use certain knives for crab picking, and making nine dollar deductions from Plaintiffs' pay for replacement knives. However, Defendants contend the nine dollar deductions did not reduce Plaintiffs' wages below the required minimum and fault Plaintiffs for failing to prove that such deductions "were a daily or even a weekly event."

Despite Defendants' contention to the contrary, liability under the FLSA is not dependent on any specified frequency of deductions. Rather, compliance with the FLSA is measured by the workweek; thus, the issue is whether any deduction occurring during a particular workweek reduced a worker's wages for that workweek below the minimum wage. A review of Defendants' payroll records reveals instances in which the nine-dollar deduction for the cost of a replacement knife during a particular week did reduce a worker's wages for that week below the minimum wage. For example, during the week of May 19, 2005, Plaintiff Mercedalia Hernandez Garcia ("Mercedalia") worked 37.53 hours at a rate of $5.17 per hour, grossing $194.03. After a nine dollar deduction for the cost of the replacement knife, Mercedalia's wages were reduced to $185.03 ($194.03-$9.00), which equates to an hourly rate of $4.93 ($185.03/37.53 hours). Accordingly, Defendants must reimburse Plaintiffs up to the point that the minimum wage is met, and Plaintiffs motion for summary judgment as to Defendants' liability regarding replacement knives is ALLOWED.