
#### Modise v. CareOne Health Services, LLC, No. 3:20-CV-765 (SVN) (D. Conn. Nov. 1, 2022)

#### Sarala V. Nagala, United States District Judge.

Individual Plaintiffs Motlalepula Modise, Morwesi Mmolawa, and Tirelo Mmolawa were formerly employed by CareOne Health Services, LLC (“CareOne”), as personal care assistants (“PCAs”) providing live-in care for elderly clients. They brought this collective action against CareOne and Abel Osagie (“Defendant”), the sole owner of the company. Plaintiffs claim that Defendant violated the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”) and the Connecticut Minimum Wage Act (“CMWA”) by failing to properly compensate them for overtime hours worked, including time their sleep was interrupted by the clients’ needs.

Defendant has now moved for summary judgment with respect to Plaintiffs’ FLSA and CMWA claims.

#### I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Pursuant to a statutory mandate, the Connecticut Department of Social Services (“DSS”) implements programs designed to regulate home healthcare and companion service agencies. The agencies must comply with the regulations and procedures and, in turn, DSS reimburses the agencies for certain services provided to eligible clients. 

One such agency is CareOne, a limited liability company owned and operated by Defendant. It is licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide home healthcare, homemaker, and companion services. To do so, CareOne employs PCAs2 and assigns them to particular elderly clients based on their needs. Consistent with the DSS regulations, CareOne offers two relevant types of services: one live-in PCA pursuant to DSS Procedure Code 1023z, who provides daytime assistance with the client’s daily living needs; or three PCAs who work eight-hour shifts to provide full-time assistance with the client’s heightened needs. Procedure Code 1023z requires an employer of a PCA providing services pursuant to that code to employ the PCA for no more than thirteen hours per day, so that the PCA can receive at least eight hours of sleep, at least five of which need to be uninterrupted, and three hours of meal break time per day. As part of the reimbursement for PCA services, DSS provides a questionnaire inquiring whether the client required care consistent with Procedure Code 1023z or a higher level of care, although it is unclear whether the client, the agency, or the PCA completes this form. 

In the context of live-in PCA services pursuant to Procedure Code 1023z, both the agency and the client “share the supervisory responsibility” with respect to the PCA. Relevant here, CareOne hired Plaintiffs to provide live-in PCA services pursuant to Procedure Code 1023z, although it never executed a formal employment agreement with them. Employees were provided with an employee handbook at the beginning of their employment that outlined certain expectations. In the CareOne office, posters on the wall explained employees’ rights under the FLSA. It is undisputed that CareOne did not enter into a written agreement with any of the three named Plaintiffs to exclude their sleep time from their compensable hours.

Plaintiff Precious Modise (“Modise”) was employed by CareOne as a PCA from April 30, 2017, to September 27, 2019. During that time, she lived with her client, Ann, who provided food and housing for her. Modise took approximately three breaks for personal time throughout each day, amounting to three hours total. It is undisputed that Modise observed that Ann “had a sleeping problem” since beginning to work with her. Modise attests that Ann typically went to sleep at 8:00 p.m.; then woke up around 11:00 p.m. and returned to sleep around midnight; then woke up around 2:00 a.m. for about thirty minutes; then woke up again around 5:00 a.m. It is further undisputed that Modise never documented the sleep interruptions in either of the two activity documentation systems provided by CareOne. Modise contends that she orally informed Defendant about Ann’s sleeping problems and that Defendant disregarded her concern, but Defendant contends that Modise never informed him about Ann’s sleeping problems.

Plaintiff Tirelo Mmolawa (“T. Mmolawa”) was employed by CareOne as a PCA from March 2, 2017, to September 14, 2019. Prior to his employment with CareOne, T. Mmolawa had been providing live-in PCA services to his client, Haddad, through a different agency. When Haddad sought PCA services from CareOne in March of 2017, T. Mmolawa was hired by CareOne, and thereafter he continued living with and providing services for Haddad. T. Mmolawa took breaks throughout the day for meals, smoking, and other personal time. T. Mmolawa attests that Haddad typically woke up four or five times each night, but, as with Modise, the parties dispute whether T. Mmolawa orally informed Defendant about Haddad’s sleeping problems. It is undisputed that T. Mmolawa did not document Haddad’s sleeping problems in either of the two activity documentation systems provided by CareOne. In March of 2019, Defendant reassigned T. Mmolawa to provide services to a different client, who did not experience sleeping problems.

Plaintiff Morwesi Mmolawa (“M. Mmolawa”) was employed by CareOne as a PCA from March 20, 2017, to September 15, 2019. During that time, she lived with her client, Geraldine, who provided food and housing for her. M. Mmolawa took breaks throughout the day for meals, personal hygiene, and phone calls. It is undisputed that Geraldine did not have routine sleeping problems. M. Mmolawa attests, however, that she had to care for Geraldine overnight in the emergency room twice per month and that she informed Defendant of these visits. 

Turning to the facts surrounding Plaintiffs’ wages, it is undisputed that they were paid $1960.00 for every two weeks of work. The calculation of that wage, however, is hotly disputed. Plaintiffs attest that they were paid a daily flat rate of $140.00. Mathematically, this is consistent with the undisputed fact that they were paid $1960.00 for every fourteen days of work, given that $1960.00 divided by fourteen equals a daily wage of $140.00. Plaintiffs further represent that, during the course of their employment, they never received a paystub or other itemized breakdown of their overtime wages or food and housing deductions.

Defendant represents that Plaintiffs were not paid a daily flat rate, and that his calculation of Plaintiffs’ wages proceeded in the following manner. First, Defendant would determine the amount of a food and housing credit. To do so, Defendant would obtain the relevant expenses from the clients, such as their mortgage payment, utility bills, property insurance, and grocery bills. If the clients did not provide him with the actual bills, which appears to have frequently been the case, he would review “certain publications” to determine “what rates are in the area.” After ascertaining the clients’ food and housing expenses, either actual or approximate, he would calculate a weekly amount and credit that amount to Plaintiffs’ wages. For example, Defendant’s records indicate that $469.66 were credited to Modise’s weekly wage to account for the food and housing provided by her client Ann. Defendant did not apply the credit on a weekly basis, however; rather, he divided the weekly food and housing credit into an hourly credit. The food credit was applied hourly throughout the entire week, but the housing credit applied only to hours above fifty-one hours per week, in other words, each hour of days five through seven of the workweek. Id. Defendant contends that, as the days progressed in the workweek, the hourly food and housing credit grew commensurately until the final take-home wage for a seven-day workweek, including the overtime wages, equaled $980.00. When multiplied by two, this weekly wage resulted in the undisputed wage of $1960.00 for every two weeks of work. In essence, Defendant contends that Plaintiffs’ wages, accounting for a credit in the amount of the food and housing provided by the client, ended up being $1960.00 every two weeks, but not because they earned a flat amount of $140.00 per day.

Part of the dispute in how Plaintiffs’ wages were calculated stems from the fact that Defendant did not provide paystubs to Plaintiffs, either in the course of their employment or in discovery. Defendant represents that, during the relevant time period, Plaintiffs were undocumented immigrants and did not have Social Security numbers, and the payroll vendor hired by CareOne “refused to process anybody that did not have a valid Social Security number.” Therefore, Defendant did not generate pay stubs for Plaintiffs. In support of the present motion, Defendant submitted records that he kept regarding Plaintiffs’ weekly wages. In the course of Plaintiffs’ employment, however, he did not furnish them with these records, or any further information regarding how he calculated the food and housing credit.

#### IV. PLAINTIFFS’ FLSA CLAIM

##### A. Legal Standard

“The FLSA was designed to protect workers and ensure that they are not subjected to working conditions ‘detrimental to the maintenance of the minimum standard of living necessary for health, efficiency, and general well-being.’ ” Specifically, the FLSA sets a minimum hourly wage, a maximum number of weekly work hours, and overtime wage requirements. “Under the FLSA, a plaintiff may bring a ‘collective action’ for his or her FLSA claims,” which allows employees “to sue on behalf of themselves and other employees who are ‘similarly situated.’” 

An employee who brings a claim for unpaid minimum or overtime wages “has the burden of proving that he performed work for which he was not properly compensated. The remedial nature of [the FLSA] and the great public policy which it embodies, however, militate against making that burden an impossible hurdle for the employee.” When the employer “has kept proper records of wages, hours and other conditions and practices of employment,” as required by the FLSA, the employee can obtain these records in discovery and utilize such records to satisfy his or her burden of proof. 

When the employer fails to keep or produce such records, however, an employee will satisfy his initial burden “if he proves that he has in fact performed work for which he was improperly compensated and if he produces sufficient evidence to show the amount and extent of that work as a matter of just and reasonable inference.” “An employee’s burden to produce sufficient evidence is low and can be met by that employee’s recollection alone.” If the employee satisfies this initial burden, “the burden then shifts to the employer to come forward with evidence of the precise amount of work performed or with evidence to negative the reasonableness of the inference to be drawn from the employee’s evidence.” “If the employer fails to produce such evidence, the court may then award damages to the employee, even though the result be only approximate.”

Generally, because the FLSA contains a two-year statute of limitations, a plaintiff may recover lost wages from two years before the filing of the suit. 29 U.S.C. § 255(a). If the employer’s violation of the FLSA is willful, however, a plaintiff can recover damages dating back to three years before the filing of the suit. An employer who violates the FLSA is generally liable for the unpaid minimum or overtime wages and “an additional equal amount as liquidated damages.” 


##### B. The Parties’ Arguments

Before examining the merits of the parties’ dispute as to the FLSA claim, the Court briefly summarizes their main arguments on this claim. At base, Plaintiffs’ complaint alleges that Defendant did not pay overtime as required under the law. Specifically, Plaintiffs contend that they worked at least ninety-one hours per week, and thus should have been paid their regular rate of pay for the first forty hours, and one-and-a-half times their regular rate of pay for the remaining fifty-one hours. Plaintiffs also allege that their sleep breaks were frequently interrupted by their clients’ needs, and that this time worked was not compensated. Because Plaintiffs were unable to have at least five hours of uninterrupted sleep per night, and because there was no agreement between Plaintiffs and CareOne to exclude interrupted sleep time, they claim that they should have been paid for the entire eight-hour rest period. Additionally, although the complaint does not allege that Defendant improperly deducted excessive amounts for food and lodging provided to Plaintiffs, that has become a central focus of the parties’ summary judgment briefing. Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs claim that Defendant has committed a willful violation of the FLSA. 

Defendant moves for summary judgment on Plaintiffs’ FLSA claim. In short, Defendant contends that he accurately calculated and paid Plaintiffs’ wages and overtime such that he did not violate the FLSA at all, much less willfully. Specifically, he argues that he appropriately credited against Plaintiffs’ wages the value of food and housing provided to Plaintiffs; that Plaintiffs did not tell him that their sleep was being interrupted, so he could not act on those issues; and, accordingly, that he properly calculated Plaintiffs’ pay. Defendant thus contends that there are no genuine issues of material fact, and that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.


##### C. Wage & Overtime Calculation

The Court begins with Defendant’s contention that he properly calculated Plaintiffs’ overtime pay, and finds genuine disputes of material fact that preclude summary judgment in Defendant’s favor. “To establish liability under the FLSA on a claim for unpaid overtime, a plaintiff must prove that he performed work for which he was not properly compensated, and that the employer had actual or constructive knowledge of that work.” Thus, Plaintiffs’ FLSA claim presents two issues for the Court to consider at the summary judgment stage: first, whether Plaintiffs were properly compensated for overtime hours it is undisputed that they worked; and second, whether Plaintiffs are entitled to compensation for overtime hours it is disputed that they worked. For the reasons that follow, the Court finds genuine disputes of material fact as to both issues.

##### 1. Pay for Undisputed Hours

First, it is undisputed that Plaintiffs worked more than forty hours per week and were entitled to overtime compensation. Specifically, the undisputed facts are that Plaintiffs typically worked at least thirteen hours per day for seven days per week, for a total of at least ninety-one hours per week. Plaintiffs contend that their daily wage of $140.00 did not reflect proper overtime compensation, whereas Defendant contends that Plaintiffs’ biweekly wage of $1960.00 reflected proper overtime compensation. Relevant here, the minimum wage for any occupation in Connecticut, which the parties do not dispute applies here, was $10.10 per hour in 2017 and 2018, then increased to $11.00 per hour in 2019. In addition, both the FLSA and CMWA require employers to pay a rate of “one and one-half times the regular rate at which [the employee] is employed” for each hour in excess of forty hours during a workweek. 29 U.S.C. § 207(a)(1). Although an employer need not compensate employees on an hourly basis, overtime compensation “must be computed on the basis of the hourly rate derived” from whatever basis on which the employees are compensated. 29 C.F.R. § 778.109.

Thus, in order to calculate how much overtime wages were owed to Plaintiffs and whether Defendant properly compensated them, the Court must “first determine the ‘regular rate’ received by plaintiffs.” “Although the FLSA does not expressly define ‘regular rate’ of pay, the Supreme Court has determined that it is ‘the hourly rate actually paid the employee for the normal, non-overtime workweek for which he is employed.’” If the employer pays the employee on an hourly basis, then the regular rate is simply the hourly rate. On the other hand, if the employer pays the employee on some other basis, such as a daily or weekly rate, then the regular rate “is the hourly rate as calculated by dividing the total sum received ... in a workweek by the total number of hours actually worked that week.” 

Plaintiffs contend that Defendant calculated their wages as a flat per-day fee and did not pay them overtime. Defendant counters that Plaintiffs were not paid a flat fee but, rather, wages that accurately took into account overtime and credits for food and lodging. As explained below, genuine issues of material fact remain as to whether Defendant properly calculated Plaintiffs’ regular rate of pay as well as the overtime they were due for the hours that it is undisputed they worked. Thus, Defendant’s summary judgment motion cannot succeed.

##### a. Flat Rate

Beginning with Plaintiffs’ argument regarding their regular rate of pay, Plaintiffs each submitted affidavits stating that they were paid a “flat rate of pay of $140 per day.” M. Mmolawa admitted at a deposition, however, that she did not understand the meaning of the word “flat” as it was used in her affidavit, and T. Mmolawa testified that Defendant had never used the word “flat” in describing the pay system to him. While a plaintiff’s statements alone are generally not sufficient to create a disputed fact to survive summary judgment, here, Plaintiffs contend that basic mathematics supports their argument that they were paid $140.00 as a flat rate per day, given that pay of $980.00 per week divided by seven days equals $140.00 as a flat rate per day. Plaintiffs further point to documents entitled “Staff Pay Record” submitted by Defendant, which appear to be the closest thing to paystubs Defendant created for Plaintiffs. Plaintiffs claim that these records evince that Defendant did not separate out “straight” time from overtime and, thus, that Defendant did not in fact pay the required overtime. Indeed, the Staff Pay Record documents consist simply of two columns, “paydates” and “amount” for the corresponding paydate; the documents do not further break down what portion of the “amount” paid on a particular payday was regular time or overtime, suggesting that Defendant did not in fact separate out these categories of pay and, therefore, did not appropriately pay overtime. Plaintiffs have also submitted a more traditional paystub Defendant provided to another former employee of CareOne who is not a party to this action, as circumstantial evidence that Defendant did not properly pay Plaintiffs overtime. The traditional paystub, Plaintiffs argue, contains fields for rate, hours, and amount, unlike the Staff Pay Record Defendant created for Plaintiffs here; Plaintiffs thus argue that Defendant was capable of producing detailed paystubs that separate out straight time and overtime, and his failure to do so for Plaintiffs demonstrates he did not properly pay them for overtime. Defendant claims he was unable to produce these more traditional paystubs for Plaintiffs because they were undocumented workers without Social Security numbers, and his payroll company thus would not process payroll for these individuals. 

In order to fully consider Plaintiffs’ argument, the Court must first address Defendant’s response. Defendant argues that, even in the absence of paystubs or more detailed payroll records, he properly calculated and paid overtime to Plaintiffs. In particular, he claims he appropriately calculated credit for housing and food provided to Plaintiffs, which, in turn, renders his wage calculations compliant with the FLSA’s overtime requirement. The Court therefore considers this argument next.


##### b. Food and Housing Credit

The FLSA permits an employer to take a wage credit for a live-in employee’s food and housing, subject to certain conditions. 29 U.S.C. § 203(m)(1). Specifically, the statute defines “wage” to include “the reasonable cost ... to the employer of furnishing such employee with board, lodging, or other facilities, if ... customarily furnished by such employer to his employees.” Consistent with its statutory mandate, the DOL has promulgated regulations permitting an employer to credit “the actual cost or fair value of furnishing lodging, whichever is less,” if such cost or value is different from the prescribed maximum credit, provided that the employer “keeps, maintains, and preserves ... the records on which they rely to justify such different cost figures.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 516.27(a), 552.100(b), 552.100(d). The records must “include itemized accounts showing the nature and amount of any expenditures entering into the computation of the reasonable cost.” 29 C.F.R. § 516.27(a)(1).

The DOL regulations provide that, if an employer of a live-in domestic service employee fails to maintain these itemized records, the maximum § 203(m) credit the employer may claim is “seven and one-half times the statutory minimum hourly wage for each week” housing is furnished. 29 C.F.R. § 552.100(d). For purposes of this regulation, the federal minimum hourly wage applies. Because the statutory federal minimum wage has been $7.25 per hour during the relevant time, 29 U.S.C. § 206(a)(1)(C), the maximum housing credit an employer who fails to maintain adequate records may claim is seven and one-half times that amount per week, which equals $54.38 per week for lodging. In addition, an employer may credit a certain amount for meals provided to the employee, which Plaintiffs compute at a maximum of $76.16 per week if the employer does not keep records justifying different meal costs. See 29 C.F.R. § 552.100(c). In total, then, in the absence of records justifying different costs, an employer may credit a maximum of $130.54 per week for both housing and food.

As noted above, here Defendant’s records indicate that he credited Plaintiffs’ wages with weekly food and housing expenses that ranged between $300 and $470 per week. Defendant’s documents supporting the present motion do not place beyond genuine dispute that he properly recorded the actual cost or fair market value of the food and housing credited to Plaintiffs’ wages. Indeed, Defendant’s own argument raises disputes as to how he calculated the food and housing credit. With respect to his client Ann, he represented that he examined her bills when calculating the food and housing credit, but he later argued that he did not have a way of obtaining the clients’ bills directly to calculate the actual costs because the clients contracted for the services through DSS rather than CareOne. Moreover, to the extent that Defendant calculated this weekly food and housing credit by relying on the actual cost or fair market value of those expenses, he did not submit evidence of that actual cost or fair market value in support of his motion to substantiate his calculations. Nor did he submit evidence indicating that he confirmed which calculation, the actual cost or the fair market value, was less, as required by the DOL regulations. 29 C.F.R. §§ 552.100(c), 552.100(d) (permitting the employer to credit “the actual cost or fair market value” of furnishing food and lodging, “whichever is less”).

The regulations and case law make clear that the burden to demonstrate proper calculation of the § 203(m) credit is on the employer, not the employee. Here, a reasonable jury could find that Defendant failed to maintain the records required by the DOL regulations to justify use of an amount beyond the otherwise maximum credit allowed by 29 C.F.R. § 552.100(d). Although there are few cases in the Second Circuit addressing this issue, courts in other circuits have held that an employer is not entitled to a § 203(m) credit greater than the regulatory maximum if they fail to meet the recordkeeping requirements to justify the greater credit.  

Defendant has not proved as a matter of law that he kept sufficient records, such that he was entitled to claim more than the otherwise applicable regulatory maximum. If a jury were to find that Defendant failed to maintain adequate records to substantiate his § 203(m) credit, he would not be entitled to such credit. Thus, this genuine dispute is material to Defendant’s liability under the FLSA, and the Court denies his motion for summary judgment regarding the food and housing credit.

Returning to Plaintiffs’ argument, particularly in light of the absence of itemized paystubs and records concerning the calculation of the food and housing credit, the Court cannot resolve the factual dispute regarding the calculation of Plaintiffs’ wages with respect to the overtime they undisputedly worked. Indeed, despite significant searching in the record, the Court is unable to discern exactly what hourly amounts Defendant claims Plaintiffs earned as their regular and overtime rates of pay. Because a reasonable jury viewing this record could find either Plaintiffs’ or Defendant’s view of the facts to be accurate, the Court is not in a position to determine what Plaintiffs’ regular rate was. Consequently, the Court cannot ascertain if Plaintiffs’ overtime wages were properly calculated with respect to the overtime hours Plaintiffs undisputedly worked, and summary judgment on that issue is not warranted.


##### 2. Pay for Disputed Hours

In addition, the parties disagree about whether Plaintiffs were entitled to overtime compensation for sleep time that was interrupted by their clients’ overnight needs. The Court characterizes these hours as disputed because the parties do not agree that they were hours worked by Plaintiffs.
 
The legal framework for compensation of sleep time is as follows. In general, the FLSA requires compensation for “work,” which includes “time spent performing activities predominantly for the benefit of the employer.” “While the FLSA itself is silent as to whether sleep time is compensable time, the DOL has promulgated interpretive rules addressing that exact issue.” “When an employee is on duty for a shift of less than twenty-four hours, but is allowed to sleep during his shift, 29 C.F.R. § 785.21 regards him as ‘working even though he is permitted to sleep ... when not busy.’ ” “So long as he is ‘required to be on duty,’ ‘the time is worktime.’” 
 
When the employee’s shift is twenty-four hours or more, he and his employer "may agree to exclude ... a bona fide regularly scheduled sleeping period of not more than 8 hours from hours worked," but only if "adequate sleeping facilities are furnished by the employer and the employee can usually enjoy an uninterrupted night’s sleep.” 29 C.F.R. § 785.22(a). If the employee “cannot get at least 5 hours’ sleep during the scheduled period the entire time is working time.” 29 C.F.R. § 785.22(b).
 
The parties dispute various aspects of the sleep time issue, including whether Plaintiffs had sleep interruptions and whether Defendant knew about these alleged interruptions. All three named Plaintiffs claim to have experienced interruptions to their sleep time because of their clients’ needs. Modise’s client, Ann, routinely woke up several times during the night and required assistance. T. Mmolawa’s client, Haddad, woke up four or five times per night. M. Mmolawa’s client, Geraldine, did not experience routine sleep difficulties, but M. Mmolawa attests that Geraldine traveled to the emergency room overnight approximately twice per month and required M. Mmolawa’s assistance during those nights. Plaintiffs further claim that because there was no appropriate place to record these interruptions in Defendant’s timekeeping system, they did not record them in writing, but they told Defendant about them. 

Defendant contends, by contrast, that Plaintiffs did not tell him about sleep interruptions. Defendant further argues that it was inherent in the nature of Plaintiffs’ job, which was coded under DSS Procedure Code 1023z, and from CareOne’s employee handbook and conversations Plaintiffs had with Defendant, that they could work only thirteen hours per day, a schedule that would accommodate eight hours for sleep and three hours for meal and rest breaks. From the parties’ conflicting recitations of facts alone, it is clear that there are genuine disputes concerning, at least, whether Plaintiffs experienced sleep interruptions and whether Defendant knew about these interruptions. These issues are material to Defendant’s alleged liability, as explained further below.

The factual dispute over whether Defendant knew that Plaintiffs were working overtime due to interruptions to their sleep, and were not compensated for such work, must go to the jury. Critically, the Second Circuit has held that “an employer’s duty under the FLSA to maintain accurate records of its employees’ hours is non-delegable.” To that end, “once an employer knows or has reason to know that an employee is working overtime, it cannot deny compensation even where the employee fails to claim overtime hours.” As another court in this circuit has explained, if the employer “does not wish that such overtime work be performed, it is the employer who ‘has a duty to make every effort to prevent its performance.’ ... The key issue is therefore whether there is evidence in the record showing the defendant had actual or constructive knowledge that the plaintiff engaged in uncompensated overtime work, regardless of whether the plaintiff followed the employer’s policy about recording overtime.” Whether an employer had actual or constructive knowledge of uncompensated overtime work “is an issue of fact.” 

Here, there is evidence from which a reasonable jury could infer that Defendant knew Plaintiffs were working uncompensated overtime hours, notwithstanding Plaintiffs’ failure to record the hours. Essentially, the parties’ dispute over whether Plaintiffs informed Defendant of the interruptions to their sleep turns on a credibility assessment, which is not properly conducted by the Court at summary judgment. Plaintiffs’ assertions as to what Defendant knew are sufficient for their claims of uncompensated interruptions to sleep time to survive the summary judgment stage. 

Further, genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Defendant entered into any agreement(s) with Plaintiffs to exclude sleep time from their pay. Defendant concedes that Plaintiffs did not sign an express written agreement with CareOne to exclude sleep time from their compensable hours. He contends, however, that he and Plaintiffs entered into an oral agreement to exclude sleep time by virtue of their employment with CareOne. Specifically, he contends that the employee handbook, informed Plaintiffs that they were “to work no more than 13 hours” per day. Defendant explained that he told Plaintiffs that, by continuing their employment with CareOne, they were “agreeing” to “work no more than 13 hours” per day. In effect, Defendant appears to contend that he had an “implied agreement” to exclude sleep time from Plaintiffs’ compensable hours. See 29 C.F.R. § 785.22(a). There are, however, numerous questions of fact material to the compensability of Plaintiffs’ sleep time.

For example, at least one court in this district has denied summary judgment because it found disputed questions of fact as to “exactly what documents and interactions even comprised the parties’ agreement, whether it was express or implied.” Similarly, the Court cannot grant summary judgment here given that it is far from clear if the parties had any kind of agreement to exclude sleep time and, if so, what the terms of that agreement were.

In addition, the DOL regulations permit an agreement to exclude sleep time only if the employee “can usually enjoy an uninterrupted night’s sleep,” and only if they can get “at least 5 hours’ sleep during the scheduled period.” 29 C.F.R. §§ 785.22(a), (b). Modise’s and T. Mmolawa’s recitations of their clients’ typical sleep schedules raise genuine disputes as to whether they were usually able to enjoy a period of five hours of uninterrupted sleep. Similarly, although M. Mmolawa’s interruptions to her sleep appear to have been less frequent, they constituted entire nights she spent attending to her client in the emergency room without sleeping at all. Thus, there are genuine disputes as to whether the sleep periods were bona fide and regularly scheduled as required under the DOL regulations. 

In sum, the Court finds genuine disputes of material fact regarding Plaintiffs’ overtime compensation, with respect to both the overtime work they indisputably performed and the alleged work they performed during sleep periods, and thus summary judgment is improper at this stage. The Court thus denies Defendant’s motion for summary judgment with respect to Plaintiffs’ overtime compensation claim under the FLSA.