### Walsh v. East Penn Manufacturing, Inc., 555 F.Supp.3d 89 (E.D. Pa. 2021)

#### PRATTER, United States District Judge.

The Secretary of Labor initiated this action against East Penn Manufacturing Co., Inc., a battery manufacturer, alleging that East Penn has failed to compensate its employees for time spent changing into and out of uniforms and personal protective equipment and showering at the end of a work shift. East Penn does not dispute that the time spent donning, doffing, and showering is compensable under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C. §§ 203 _et seq._ The crux of the dispute is whether East Penn's pay policies, which compensate employees based on what it deems a "reasonable" time for these tasks, are sound as a matter of law and sufficient as a matter of fact. Contrary to the Secretary's contentions, East Penn disputes that it is legally required to compensate for the actual time expended by any given employee. But to the extent that such compensation as it pays is deficient, East Penn then maintains that the difference between what is "reasonable" and what would be "actual" is de minimis. Like the Energizer Bunny, the parties have pounded their steady drumbeats, with each side steadfast in its belief that it poses the correct standard of measurement.


#### BACKGROUND

East Penn manufactures and recycles lead acid batteries at its Lyon Station, Pennsylvania campus. The Lyon Station facility consists of roughly 30 separate divisions and plants, including automotive, industrial, metals, and manufacturing support services. East Penn employees are not union represented and have not entered into a collective bargaining agreement with their employer.

Most of East Penn's plants operate 24 hours a day, divided into three consecutive eight-hour shifts. The exception is East Penn's "continuous operations" departments which—as its name suggests—operate with partially overlapping eight-and-a-half hour shifts. The overlapping scheduling ensures that the machines in those plants are never taken offline.

East Penn requires that all employees at the Lyon Station campus wear personal protective equipment, regardless of their risk of exposure to lead, chemicals, or other hazards. Because of the chemicals with which they work, certain East Penn employees are required to change out of their street clothes and into a uniform prior to entering the production floor at the beginning of their shifts. This uniform is supplied each day and the employee is required to be fully dressed in the uniform prior to entering the production floor. Depending on the hazards associated with the job, East Penn also requires certain employees to wear additional PPE, including safety shoes, respirators, and hard hats. 

At the end of their shifts, uniformed employees remove their uniforms and change back into their street clothes prior to leaving the facility. Some of them also shower as part of their end-of-shift activities. The parties dispute whether all uniformed employees are required to shower as part of the end of shift activities. East Penn maintains that only uniformed employees who work in defined lead exposure areas must shower. But it is undisputed that employees face disciplinary action for failing to wear their uniforms and for failing to shower, if showering is required.

##### A. Tracking East Penn Employees' Time

East Penn maintains two sets of time records for each of their employees. The first is what East Penn deems "actual" time (or "Actl" as appears on some time sheets). Per East Penn policy, all employees are required to swipe in and out using a card-scanning system located in the plant to which they are assigned. Employees are required to swipe in no more than 14 minutes before the start of their shift and 14 minutes after the end of their paid shift. The time clock system records these swipe times to the minute, which are then preserved in East Penn's "mainframe."

The second set of time records is for "adjusted" time. Adjusted time corresponds to the employees' scheduled shift times and does not show the 1-14 minutes before and after shifts. Both the actual and adjusted time entries appear on an employee's Payroll Transaction Edit List.East Penn does not pay for "actual" time—that is, the recorded between the swipes. Instead, East Penn pays employees based on "adjusted" time—the length of their scheduled production shift—which is paid out in 15-minute increments. Some employees swipe in when their shift time officially starts so there is no discrepancy between "actual" and "adjusted" time. 

The parties dispute the import of time clocks and East Penn's requirement that employees clock in and out no more than 14 minutes from the start and end of their shifts. East Penn maintains that the time clock policy is used only as an attendance tool to ensure that employees are in the plant for their full shift, not to mark the official beginning or ending of the continuous workday as a means to calculate pay. The Secretary contends that the "14-minute rule" is probative of East Penn's knowledge that its employees required more than the time East Penn has allotted to complete pre- and post-shift activities.

##### B. East Penn's Pay Policies for Donning and Doffing

There are two pertinent East Penn policies governing beginning and end-of-day activities. East Penn's Time Clock and Pay Procedures, effective as of 1998, require that each employee be at her or his workstation at shift starting time. In 2003, East Penn formalized a five-minute "grace period" for compensable start-of-shift clothes changing (the 2003 Company Uniform Policy). Under this policy, "for pay purposes," employees have five minutes after the start of their shift to report to their workstation. 

In 2016, in response to an employee complaint, East Penn increased its paid shower and end-of-shift clothes changing time in all plants to ten minutes (the 2016 Personal Protective Equipment/Uniform/Shower Policy). Since then, if an employee works in an area that requires a uniform, the following policy applies:

> 1. Employees are expected to be at their designated workstations wearing their uniform and other PPE (Personal Protection Equipment) at the start of their shift. For pay purposes, _employees will be granted a five-minute grace period_ after the start of the shift to report to their workstation for the purpose of donning uniforms. Employees may be granted longer clean up time in departments or under certain circumstances when approved by Plant Management of Supervisor.
> 
> 2. Employees will be granted a _10-minute shower time_ which includes walking distance to the locker room, doffing the uniform and showering.


##### C. Time Spent by Uniformed Employees on Pre and Post Shift Activities

The time that East Penn employees spend donning, doffing, and showering is compensable. The parties dispute whether the employees performed this compensable work outside of their eight-hour shift times.

During discovery, East Penn stated that its pertinent personnel are aware that some employees don their uniforms prior to the start of their shift and that some employees arrive at their workstations prior to the start of their shift. In support of its motion for summary judgment, East Penn submitted some 650 employee declarations. Employees attest to the time they arrive at work and their pre- and post-shift routine, including estimating the amount of time for each. Of those, roughly 200 employees acknowledged that the grace period exists, and of that subset, some of them stated that they make use of the grace period some portion of the time. Other employees declare that they acquire and don their uniform prior to the shift start.

To support its claim that employees were expected or made to work off the clock, the Secretary submitted the results of a time study conducted by his expert, Dr. Robert G. Radwin. Dr. Radwin conducted what is known as a "did-take" study that measures the actual time employees spent to perform given tasks. Of the 29 plants within the Lyon Station complex, he selected a subset of eight plants to study. Within those eight plants, he and his research team ultimately observed the pre-shift activities of 370 randomly selected employees who were required to wear uniforms and PPE and post-shift activities of 131 employees who were likewise required to wear uniforms and shower. Doc. No. 174 at 9.

To determine when uniformed employees begin their pre-shift activities, Dr. Radwin measured the time between their "first touch"—i.e., when they acquired their uniform or PPE item—and compared that time to their shift start time. Dr. Radwin concluded that, for those uniformed employees, the 370 uniformed employees performed their "first touch" approximately 15.6 minutes before their shift time started. As for measuring the time to complete end-of-shift activities, Dr. Radwin recorded the time that uniformed employees left the production floor and the time of their last touch. Dr. Radwin did not compare the results of his study to the amount of time East Penn's pay policies operate to compensate an employee.

East Penn admits that Dr. Radwin's "own subjects acquired and donned their uniform either entirely or _partially on paid time,_ i.e., during East Penn's grace period." 

#### DISCUSSION

#### I. Applicable FLSA Law

The Court begins its evaluation of the three cross-motions for summary judgment and three motions to strike by providing an overview of the FLSA, the Portal-to-Portal Act, and case law bearing on the compensability of the activities at issue in this case and an employer's statutory obligations.

Though perhaps surprising, the FLSA does not define "work." The Supreme Court has described work, for purposes of the Act, as "physical or mental exertion (whether burdensome or not) controlled or required by the employer and pursued necessarily and primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business." Over 50 years ago, the Supreme Court held that the time spent walking to workstations after punching a timecard was compensable. _Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery Co.,_ 328 U.S. 680 (1946). But the Court also introduced a limiting principle to the idea that any time spent on such work is necessarily compensable. "Insubstantial and insignificant periods of time spent in preliminary activities need not be included in the statutory workweek." The "de minimis" doctrine thus allows for "only a few seconds or minutes of work beyond the scheduled working hours ... to be disregarded ..." to avoid "split-second absurdities." The doctrine, which accounts for the realities of the industrial world, is not an unfamiliar principle of practicality.

Concerned about the potential overbreadth of the result in _Mt. Clemens,_ Congress enacted the Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947, 29 U.S.C. §§ 251 _et seq.,_ which amended provisions of the FLSA and carved out activities that might otherwise be considered compensable. Relevant to this case, the Portal-to-Portal Act precluded compensation for "preliminary or postliminary" activities to the principal work. 29 U.S.C. § 254(a)(2). "Principal activities" are those that the employee is "employed to perform" or activities that are integral and indispensable to the principal activity. [29 C.F.R. § 790.8](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/790.8). The Portal-to-Portal Act did not, however, alter or amend the Court's definition of "work," nor did it disturb the de minimis doctrine. [29 C.F.R. § 785.7](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/785.7).

The Supreme Court subsequently held that activities before or after the workday that are an "integral and indispensable part of the principal activities" are compensable under the FLSA. _Steiner v. Mitchell,_ 350 U.S. 247 (1956). _Steiner_ held that donning and doffing personal protective gear and post-work showering were integral and indispensable for certain workers in a battery plant who regularly handled hazardous materials. The Court confirmed that it "would be difficult to conjure up an instance where changing clothes and showering are more clearly an integral and indispensable part of the principal activity of the employment than in the case of these employees." Because the time spent changing clothes and showering constituted "work" under the FLSA, the battery plant employees were entitled to compensation during or for those activities.

Most recently in _IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez_, the Court sought to clarify the definition of "compensable time" under the FLSA in light of both the Portal-to-Portal Act and Steiner. Finding that doffing gear that is integral and indispensable to work is a principal activity, the Court went on to hold that time spent waiting to doff is covered by the FLSA and is not affected by the Portal-to-Portal Act. Conversely, it held that time spent waiting to don the first piece of gear—to mark the start of the continuous, and compensable, workday—is not covered by the FLSA. 

In some respects, the _Alvarez_ decision announced some clear markers. The Department of Labor interpreted _Alvarez_ to "clearly stand for the proposition that where the aggregate time spent donning, walking, waiting and doffing exceeds the de minimis standard, it is compensable." The Court, however, did not resolve all ambiguities that have percolated since _Steiner_—notably what the parties contend is a burgeoning circuit split over how to calculate compensable time.

#### II. The Secretary's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment

The Secretary requests that the Court rule in his favor on 11 separate issues that go both to East Penn's liability and available damages. The Secretary seeks summary judgment in his favor as to the substantive FLSA claims as to liability and to foreclose East Penn from contesting damages, including by presenting a de minimis defense. The Court, having carefully reviewed the disputes of fact that prevent resolution of certain issues on summary judgment, grants the Secretary's motion in part and denies it in part.

##### A. Uncontested Issues

Of the 11 grounds raised by the Secretary, East Penn does not dispute two of them: it admits (1) that it is a covered enterprise engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce under the FLSA, and (2) that the donning and doffing activities at issue are considered "integral and indispensable" within the meaning of _Steiner v. Mitchell_. Accordingly, the Court grants summary judgment in the Secretary's favor as to these two undisputed issues.

##### B. Correct Measurement of Compensable Time

The Secretary moves for summary judgment as to the activities that start and stop the "continuous workday." The "continuous workday rule" defines the "workday" as "the period between the commencement and completion on the same workday of an employee's principal activity or activities." The Supreme Court held that "principal activity or activities ... embraces all activities which are an integral and indispensable part of the principal activities." Although East Penn admits that donning, doffing, and showering are integral and indispensable activities, it does not agree that it is obligated to pay for all time between the start and stop of the continuous workday (excluding meal breaks or off-duty breaks).

As has been previewed in prior memoranda throughout this litigation, the parties vigorously dispute the correct measure of the continuous workday. The Secretary asks the Court to find, as a matter of law, that East Penn must record and pay their uniformed employees for the _actual_ time it takes to don and doff a uniform and shower. East Penn asserts that it must compensate its employees only for time reasonably spent donning, doffing, and showering. East Penn admits that it does not record and has not recorded and does not pay for the actual time spent on the indisputably compensable activities. But it contends that the 15 minutes of compensable time it applies to its employees (i.e., the five-minute grace period at the start, and the ten minutes at the end of the day) is reasonable and sufficient.

As a matter of legal principle, the Court cannot adopt East Penn's position. The Court reaches this conclusion having reviewed relevant case law, as well as the Department of Labor's rulings, opinions, and interpretations. Collectively, these sources support the Secretary's interpretation as a matter of precedent, pragmatism, and, of no small moment, achieving the purpose of the FLSA.

Although the Supreme Court in _Alvarez_ did not reach the issue of the correct method of measurement, it unequivocally held that the continuous workday rule requires that employees be compensated for all time spent during the continuous workday. Nothing in the Court's opinion suggests that "all" is interchangeable or otherwise synonymous with "reasonable."

At first glance, the circuit courts of appeals that have addressed the correct measure appear to be split between an actual and reasonable time standard. Absent binding precedent from the Third Circuit Court of Appeals on this issue, this Court may look to other circuits for helpful guidance. The Ninth and Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals appear to adopt a reasonable time standard, while the Second and Sixth Circuits have endorsed an actual time requirement. But partitioning in this way is overly reductive. That is because no circuit court has endorsed the reasonable time standard after _Alvarez_ was issued.

Moreover, when those courts that have endorsed a reasonable time standard, it was in the context of fashioning a damages award when there were no records of actual compensable time worked. The circuit "split" disappears when one considers the difference between liability and damages. In _Alvarez v. IBP_, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision to calculate compensable time on the "basis of a reasonable time" as "within the district court's discretion." Although the Tenth Circuit in _Reich v. IBP, Inc_ discussed a reasonable time measure for calculating back pay damages, the resulting permanent injunction obligated the defendant to "implement recordkeeping practices sufficient to record the time spent by each employee in performing pre-shift and post-shift activities found to be compensable under the Act." So put, the Tenth Circuit was not endorsing an employer's own "reasonable" calculation of work in perpetuity.

Within this Circuit, East Penn interprets _Lugo v. Farmer's Pride Inc_ to "embrace" a reasonable time standard. It is true that _Lugo_ permitted the defendant's expert to present evidence "to assist the jury in determining the reasonable amount of time that Defendant's employees spend on certain activities at the poultry production plant, including donning, doffing, sanitizing, washing, and walking." But finding that the expert's methodology is admissible for consideration is not a ruling on the proper standard for measuring time worked.

In each of these cases, the courts relied on reasonable estimations as a proxy to reconstruct the amount of time the employees spent because there were no time records. It does not absolve an employer of its obligations under the FLSA to record and compensate for actual time. 29 U.S.C. § 211(c).

Indeed, recent donning and doffing cases have held actual time is the appropriate standard because it more faithfully adheres to precedent and the statutory purposes of the FLSA.

East Penn seizes on certain language in _Mt. Clemens_ that comments on the unfairness and impracticality of compensating employees who take "roundabout journeys \[to their workstation\] for purely personal reasons." East Penn's argument is pragmatic and, for that reason, tempting. But it is not legally sound. Theoretically, a worker could arrive well in advance of his shift, don his uniform—thereby initiating the continuous workday—then lounge about for some extended amount of time, and claim compensation for that leisure time. The Court is certainly mindful of this possibility. To the extent East Penn is fearful of excess idling, it can implement policies to manage the work performed during the continuous workday. But speculation that an intrepid, self-indulgent employee might take advantage of the legal standard cannot support prophylactically chiseling wages.

Beyond persuasive jurisprudence, the Court can also consider the Secretary of Labor's and the Wage and Hour Division's rulings, opinions, and interpretations as they "constitute a body of experienced and informed judgment." 

Support for the actual time standard appears in Department of Labor regulations, including one that East Penn relies on. Although [29 C.F.R. § 785.48(a)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/785.48) does not obligate an employer to use time clocks, for those that do—like East Penn— the regulation discourages discrepancies between clock records and "actual hours worked." That is because gaps in those time values "raise a doubt as to the accuracy of the records of the hours actually worked."

In what has pre-occupied much of the parties' post-summary judgment briefing here, the parties have submitted dueling notices of supplemental authority from prior DOL interpretations and guidance. Each side claims they are providing the clean, unambiguous answer. The Court cannot agree. The stacks of briefing on competing interpretations alone suggest the answer is not so obvious. So, the Court gives minimal probative value to these "authorities."

The Secretary cites to a 2001 Opinion Letter from the Wage and Hour Division, which it argues establishes the DOL's endorsement of actual time. In response to whether an employer could permissibly pay all employees based on an average amount of time that all employees work, the DOL responded that "company must record and pay for each employee's actual hours of work, including compensable time spent putting on, taking off and cleaning his or her protective equipment, clothing or gear."

East Penn relies on the DOL's Wage and Hour Division Field Operations Handbook for what it contends supports a reasonable time standard. Courts have found that the Handbook lacks the force of law and is not entitled to deference under _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837 (1984). However, the Handbook may be considered to the extent it offers persuasive guidance. _Skidmore v. Swift & Co.,_ 323 U.S. 134 (1944).


The Handbook authorizes employers to "set up a formula by which employees are allowed given amounts of time to perform clothes changing and washup activities, provided the time set is reasonable in relation to the actual time required to perform such activities." To the extent the Court considers the Handbook, it is at most of little relevance. That is because the cited provision applies where a collective bargaining agreement governs but is silent whether clothes changing and wash-up time should be included in hours worked. CBAs are a means of ordering a labor relationship between employer and employees through the private law. Here, there is no CBA for East Penn employees.

But even if a CBA were in place, East Penn relies on version of the FOH from 1996. The later-in-time 2001 Opinion Letter from the DOL states that a company must record and pay for actual hours of work.

Finally, the Supreme Court has consistently held that the FLSA should be liberally construed in favor of employees. The actual time standard effectuates this employee-centric policy goal, incentivizing employers to comply with the FLSA's record-keeping requirements while guaranteeing that employees are appropriately compensated.

Accordingly, the Court grants summary judgment in the Secretary's favor on this point. It is improper as a matter of law for East Penn to pay an estimated amount of time for compensable pre- and post-shift activities, as they are properly part of the continuous workday. To the extent that the concept of "reasonableness" permeates this case, it is limited to the calculation of damages once liability is established.


##### D. Whether East Penn Violated the FLSA Overtime Requirements

The Secretary also moves for a finding that East Penn violated the FLSA's overtime provision by failing to compensate its uniformed employees for the actual time spent donning, doffing, and showering. In other words, the Court must find that no reasonable jury could find that East Penn did not fully compensate its uniformed employees for the actual time spent on these activities.

Even though the Court found that East Penn's records are inadequate, the Secretary has the burden of proving that the employees have actually performed work for which they were improperly compensated. 

East Penn does not dispute that it does not compensate for actual time spent on these activities. That is because East Penn maintains that it pays for what it deems a "reasonable" amount of time as part of the shift time. East Penn's undisputed pay policy for uniformed (non-continuous operations) employees provides for five minutes of donning time, should the employee use the "grace period," and ten minutes of doffing and showering time— independent of whether it takes employees more or less than this allotted amount of time. But, in opposing summary judgment as to its liability, East Penn argues that the Secretary has failed to show that the employees' claims exceed the time already compensated.

In support of its motion, the Secretary relies on (1) East Penn's admissions, (2) employee declarations that East Penn gathered and submitted, (3) time study data from Dr. Radwin, and (4) East Penn's time clock records showing the swipe in and out time.

_First,_ the Secretary relies on East Penn's own admissions that its pay practices violate the FLSA's overtime provision. In its responses to requests for admission and deposition testimony from managers, East Penn admits that it is aware that "some employees chose to don required PPE before their scheduled shift starting time, that "some employees chose to shower after their schedule shift time," and that management observed employees arriving at their workstation prior to their shift time. It is undisputed that East Penn employees are paid for their scheduled eight-hour shift time. So, if an employee dons his uniform prior to the start of his shift—an activity that East Penn does not dispute is compensable work—East Penn admittedly does not compensate for that time.

East Penn responds that not all employees don uniforms and PPE prior to the start of their shift, opting instead to use the grace period, nor are they required to. But it undisputed that East Penn's Time Clock and Pay Procedures require that each employee be at his workstation at shift starting time. East Penn does not square this seeming inconsistency. Rather, it relies on employee declarations that acknowledge the existence of the grace period and their use of it. Because the correct legal standard is payment for "actual" work, the existence of the five-minute grace period—whether illusory as the Secretary contends or fully in effect as East Penn urges—does not change the analysis. If an employee acquires and dons his uniform prior to the start of his shift, that employee has "suffered" work and is legally entitled to compensation.

_Second,_ the Secretary points to the roughly 650 declarations from East Penn employees that the company gathered and submitted as evidence that its employees routinely used more than five minutes for donning activities. East Penn does not dispute the authenticity or contents of the hundreds of these declarations.

The Secretary maintains that overtime violations appear on the face of the declarations that East Penn produced. Certain employee declarants attest to the grace period but take more than the allotted five minutes. 

East Penn responds that the declarants also state that they "believe that they have been properly and fully compensated for all straight time and overtime hours associated with their regular production work as well as their donning/doffing activities before and after their regularly scheduled shift time." So, East Penn maintains, the employees themselves undermine the Secretary's case. The Court is not so convinced for two reasons. First, to the extent East Penn questions the reliability of the time estimates, such a challenge does not raise a genuine dispute of material fact. That is because East Penn does not dispute the fact the employees have stated that they don their uniforms and PPE _prior_ to the start of their shift. It is this admission of work performed out-side of the compensable eight-hour shift that the Secretary relies on to establish liability.

Second, at summary judgment, the Court avoids credibility determinations as to the declarants' beliefs. To the extent the declarations contain evidence that is unfavorable to East Penn's case, that evidence can nevertheless be construed against East Penn. That is because East Penn is the party proponent of the evidence and because it is clear that the formats of the declarations, which each follow the same format, were prepared by counsel.

On the basis of East Penn's admissions and its own declarations—the contents of which East Penn does not dispute—the Court finds that the Secretary has established that East Penn's pay practices violate the FLSA's overtime provisions as to its uniformed non-continuous operations employees. Although the Court finds East Penn has admitted liability as to this subgroup of employees, that is not the end of the inquiry. Rather, this ruling is separate and distinct from determining whether East Penn can assert a de minimis defense that may reduce or eliminate any damages.

The Secretary also offers Dr. Radwin's time study as representative evidence to establish that employees donned, doffed, and showered outside of their paid shift times. As for end-of-shift activities, Dr. Radwin calculated that, for the 125 uniformed employees he studied, 11 minutes passed between leaving the production floor and completing their last activity. East Penn does not dispute that he reported an 11-minute average, to the extent he documented his observations. But it notes that this figure does not account for the ten minutes of paid time (and 20 minutes for continuous operations employees) that its employees are allotted at the end of a shift. Indeed, Dr. Radwin testified that he did not calculate a measure of uncompensated time and acknowledged that some number of his subjects were compensated—in whole or in part—for those activities measured.

As to pre-shift activities, of the 370 uniformed employees he chose to study, Dr. Radwin estimated that, on average, they began their workday roughly 16 minutes before shift started. East Penn does not dispute that this is the figure Dr. Radwin reported. But it again criticizes the reliability of this assertion, including whether the employees' activity actually is "integral and indispensable" —hence, compensable—so as to start the continuous workday.

East Penn has launched numerous challenges to Dr. Radwin's methodology and calculations, including his admitted extrapolating the estimated one-plant average to all plants and employees, the reliability of his methodology. The Court has already found that these attacks go to the weight of his testimony—"vulnerable as it may very well be"—and not to its admissibility. 

The Court already found that the task of evaluating Dr. Radwin's methodology and the import of his findings should go to the jury. Indeed, a reasonable jury could very well discredit or give little weight to this expert's sampling testimony, including whether it is "representative," and whether it measured compensable activities. The Court declines to step into the jury's shoes and conduct the weighting itself as a matter of law on the papers. Moreover, the Court finds that Dr. Radwin's estimations arguably go to any damages determination at trial.

##### E. East Penn's Time Clock Records as Minimum Amount of Uncompensated Time

The Secretary also moves for summary judgment on a finding that East Penn's swipe in and out time clock records constitute the "indisputable" minimum measure of overtime hours worked. According to the Secretary, the amount of time between punch time and shift time is time that East Penn knowingly "shaved off." So doing, the Secretary seeks to use these records as a proxy for uncompensated time.

The parties dispute whether the punch records are probative of anything that would establish liability. East Penn contends that its "14-minute rule" serves only as an attendance policy and is common throughout the manufacturing industry, including being used by the employer in _Mt. Clemens._ The Supreme Court found there that "the time clocks do not necessarily record the actual time worked by employees." Nor are time clocks controlling when "the employee is required to be on the premises or on duty at a different time or where the payroll or other facts indicate that work starts at an earlier or later period.

The Secretary argues that the time clock data is the best evidence of the minimum amount of uncompensated time that East Penn owes its uniformed employees. He bases this claim on certain of East Penn's own employees' declarations that describe performing their donning and doffing activities contemporaneous with clocking in and out, as well as Dr. Radwin's observations that, on average, employees in his time study swiped in after their first donning activity.

The fundamental problem with the Secretary's hopscotch to damages, as East Penn notes, is that the Secretary has not carried his burden yet to establish liability as to the 10,000-some employees he purports to represent. Although the Court finds that the Secretary has established that he succeeds on liability as to non-continuous operations uniformed employees, he seeks overtime damages for many other categories of employees for which he has certainly not adduced representative evidence.

Moreover, the Secretary's argument presupposes that employees contemporaneously clock-in with performing their first and last principal activity. East Penn does not admit this fact. Although the Secretary cites to certain employee declarations attesting to this fact, other declarants state that they clock in, attend to non-compensable work, then retrieve and don their uniform. East Penn has raised at least a factual issue to show that it does not have to compensate for all "recorded" time between the punches because employees began their compensable workday after clocking in.

The Secretary's claim is also complicated by the findings of its own time study expert. Dr. Radwin estimated that, on average, the employees he studied swiped their timecard 1.2 minutes _after_ they had completed their last clothes-changing activity. Even accepting the Secretary's premise that the time swipes are any sort of proxy, it is undisputed that the time swipe records on average overestimate the amount of compensable work for post-shift activities. Accordingly, the Court cannot find that the record "indisputably" establishes that the actual clock swipe records are the minimum amount of time worked for purposes of establishing damages.

To be sure, the Court's decision on this point does not preclude, nor should it be taken as precluding or otherwise limiting, the Secretary from submitting the actual clock records at trial to try to establish his claim for damages.

##### F. East Penn's de minimis Defense

Preliminary and postliminary activities that are deemed integral and indispensable are theoretically compensable although they may not be automatically so. The de minimis doctrine provides a "limiting principle to compensation for trivial calculable quantities of work." The Secretary moves for summary judgment to foreclose East Penn from presenting a de minimis defense at trial. According to the Secretary, East Penn has failed to establish that it satisfies the requirements of [29 C.F.R. § 785.47](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/29/785.47). At summary judgment, the Secretary must show that no reasonable jury could find that the amount of compensation is not de minimis.

In evaluating a de minimis defense, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals has held the following factors be considered: "(1) the practical administrative difficulty of recording the additional time; (2) the aggregate amount of compensable time; and (3) the regularity of the additional work." The line between compensable and de minimis time is fact-specific and the defense necessarily applies on a case-by-case basis. Indeed, the Court is not aware of any court within this Circuit that has granted summary judgment to an FLSA plaintiff to prevent a defendant from asserting a de minimis defense at trial. (The Secretary, to his advocate-nature credit, located two out-of-circuit decisions.)

As a threshold matter, there is no genuine dispute of fact that East Penn's employees regularly don, doff, and shower as part of their work. East Penn required all employees to wear PPE and required its uniformed employees to be fully dressed in their uniform and boots prior to entering the production floor. East Penn points out that its employees may perform their donning and doffing activities differently each day. But the order in which an employee opts to don his uniform and PPE on a particular day does not rebut a finding that the activities are performed on a regular basis. 

The Secretary submits that whatever practical administrative challenges inherent in measuring the time worked are minimized by the fact that East Penn already uses time clocks and requires employees to swipe in and out. The mere existence of the time clocks, according to the Secretary, establishes that East Penn could—but chooses not to—promulgate a policy that pays based on actual swipe times.

According to East Penn, the Secretary's proposal that East Penn simply install more time clocks and implement new policies governing clocking in and out cannot be considered at summary judgment because it derives from the Secretary's descriptions of other battery manufacturing plants. Although these third-party practices are not in evidence in this case, the Court rejects that East Penn's claim that it cannot consider whether East Penn can theoretically add more clocks to its production floors. East Penn controls how and where it places time clocks as well as the policies governing swiping in and out. Moreover, East Penn's timekeeping system permits it to accurately record increments of time to the minute. So, the system that East Penn already has in place rebuts the notion of administrative difficulties it may face in accurately tracking the actual amount of time spent on pre- and post-shift compensable work.

But East Penn's more compelling argument is that the focus of this factor is not on the employer's theoretical technological capability. Rather, the proper inquiry is whether there is wide variation in the amount of time spent on pre- and post-shift activities among East Penn's uniformed and PPE-wearing employees. The fact of variation is corroborated by Dr. Radwin's measurements. For example, he reported a range of zero minutes to greater than 51 minutes reflecting the time between the employees starting their pre-shift activities and their shift. Neither party expressly addresses how much of this pre-shift time was spent on actual compensable work. And despite the breath-taking volumes of briefing and exhibits, "the court is not obliged to scour the record to find evidence that will support a party's claims." 

That said, the Court has reviewed the contents of employee declarations that include estimates of the amount of time to don a uniform and walk to their workstations. Without weighing the credibility of these declarants, the Court notes a pattern among employees who attest to spending between three and nine minutes on these activities. So, within Dr. Radwin's own limited study, there are swaths of time spent on non-compensable activities (i.e., time spent in the break room, cafeteria, or "smoke shack"). At a minimum, East Penn has raised a genuine issue of fact as to the practical feasibility of precisely recording time for purposes of payroll that separates out compensable from social and non-compensable activities.

As for the aggregate amount of compensable time involved, the Court finds that genuine disputes preclude granting summary judgment to the Secretary. As a threshold matter, the amount of time that employees don, doff, and shower each day is a disputed issue. The parties' time-study experts employed different methodologies to calculate the amount of time employees spent performing their pre and post-shift activities. And the Court has permitted each party to introduce evidence of both methodologies and findings. Even crediting the results of Dr. Radwin's study, East Penn submits that the results support a finding that any left-over uncompensated time for post-shift work is de minimis.

In particular, Dr. Radwin estimated an average of 11 minutes and a median 10.8 minutes for end-of-shift clothes changing and showering. It is undisputed that East Penn's policy (since 2016) provides for ten minutes of paid time for these activities. Accepting the validity of Dr. Radwin's calculations —which East Penn does not—a rational trier of fact could find that the remainder of uncompensated time according to Dr. Radwin at the end of the shift is on average a single minute. Although the Secretary may dispute whether employees are actually afforded the full ten minutes (i.e., if they are not timely released from their workstations), that dispute also supports the Court's finding that summary judgment is inappropriate. As for the 15.6 minutes that Dr. Radwin estimated for pre-shift activities, East Penn contests the validity of this finding. And because the Court has already determined that East Penn can make its arguments challenging the time study, it is inappropriate to treat these figures as established, particularly when it is the Secretary's burden here on summary judgment.

Notwithstanding the Court's finding that regularity of the work has been established, factual issues prevent the Court from granting summary judgment as to this claim. The Court finds a genuine issue of material fact remains as to the size of the aggregate claim as well as whether East Penn can practically record the time spent, given the variation of time needed in the record. The Court finds that East Penn may present a de minimis defense at trial, which will be a critical factual issue for the jury to resolve. 