### Egan v. A.W. Companies, Inc., No. 23 C 1148 (N.D. Ill. Oct. 3, 2024)

#### MATTHEW F. KENNELLY, District Judge:

Plaintiffs Kate Egan, Kenneth Berry, Michelle Brandt, Nicole Gonzalez, and Amber Lyne have filed suit individually and on behalf of others similarly situated against defendants A.W. Companies, Inc. and Meijer, Inc. Plaintiffs assert claims under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 29 U.S.C. § 216(b) \[and state wage and hour law.\]. Plaintiffs also have sought leave to file a fourth amended complaint including a retaliation claim against A.W. arising from A.W.’s assertion of a counterclaim against the plaintiffs.

Defendant Meijer, which was first named in plaintiffs’ third amended complaint, has moved to dismiss. Meijer seeks dismissal under ... Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted.

For their part, plaintiffs have moved to dismiss A.W.’s counterclaim under ... Rule 12(b)(6).

The Court will address Meijer’s motion first and plaintiffs’ motion second.

[Background]{.casesection}

This case arises from a dispute regarding A.W. and Meijer’s alleged failure to pay the plaintiffs and those similarly situated for all the time they worked. The plaintiffs are Contact Center Agents (CCAs)—remote, hourly workers who field calls from Meijer customers regarding various issues concerning Meijer’s website and retail stores. Plaintiffs assert that A.W. and Meijer have failed to properly pay them for time spent loading and logging into computer systems. A.W. has asserted a counterclaim against plaintiffs for breach of contract for failing to properly and completely report the hours they claim to have worked.

[A\. Plaintiffs’ suit against A.W. and Meijer]{.casesubsection}

A.W. Companies offers, among other things, call center services that outsource its employees to provide live, telephonic customer support to various businesses. Meijer is one such business. The specific parameters of A.W.’s services to Meijer are outlined in a Statement of Work, which sets forth requirements for how CCAs should handle calls from Meijer customers.

The thrust of plaintiffs’ claims are that A.W. and Meijer fail to properly pay CCAs for overtime by forcing them to work off-the-clock to complete necessary tasks pre-shift, post-shift, and during unpaid meal periods. Specifically, plaintiffs allege that A.W. and Meijer require all CCAs to be “call-ready no more than 1–2 minutes after the start of their scheduled shift.” To be call-ready, CCAs are required to turn on and log into their A.W.-issued computers, connect to the virtual private network (VPN), log into numerous work-related programs, and review e-mails containing work instructions for the day, program updates, and promotions. Plaintiffs assert that the entire pre-shift process—all of which occurs before CCAs clock in—takes between “fifteen (15) to twenty (20) minutes per day, and the tasks can take longer if CCAs experience technical problems with the computer, software, and/or applications.” Plaintiffs allege they are also required to return early from their unpaid lunch breaks “to perform at least part of the boot up process” required pre-shift. According to plaintiffs, this takes roughly two to five minutes but can take longer “when CCAs are required to do a complete reboot” of their devices. Finally, plaintiffs assert that A.W.’s policies prohibit CCAs from “beginning the shutdown and logout process until their scheduled shifts end and they complete their last fielded call,” thus requiring them to spend another two to three minutes to shut down and log out of their devices after their shifts have ended. According to plaintiffs, “A.W. Companies’s employee handbook instructs CCAs to record time on their timecards consistent with their scheduled hours” and “threatens CCAS with discipline, including possible termination, if they do not report their scheduled hours on their timecards.” Because the pre-shift work is not part of their “scheduled hours,” plaintiffs contend, they are effectively forced to underreport their hours by approximately fourteen to twenty-three minutes per shift. For an average five-shift, forty-hour workweek, this totals to roughly an hour or two of lost wages per week—all of which would be overtime pay at an enhanced hourly rate.

Though plaintiffs’ paychecks come from A.W., they allege that A.W. and Meijer are joint employers and that as a result, both are liable for unpaid overtime wages under the FLSA and similar state wage laws. In this regard, plaintiffs specifically assert that Meijer is involved in the pre-screening process for CCAs and “has the right at any time and for any reason to reject” a CCA from being staffed on Meijer’s account with A.W. Once staffed on the Meijer account, plaintiffs contend, they are required to adhere to Meijer’s training materials and protocols for requesting time off work. Plaintiffs further allege that A.W. provides Meijer with performance metrics for each CCA working with its customers, including plaintiffs. In addition, according to plaintiffs, Meijer provides “the platform for call distribution, call center reporting, and management of queues” that CCAs use to assist Meijer customers. Plaintiffs further contend that Meijer provides CCAs with Meijer e-mails and phone scripts, which direct CCAs to “introduce themselves as Meijer agents to customers” and “represent to Meijer customers that they are located at Meijer’s headquarters in Grand Rapids, Michigan.” Finally, plaintiffs contend that they are subject to performance reviews and discipline by both A.W. and Meijer. Plaintiff Brandt specifically contends that she was terminated at Meijer’s direction following two negative performance reviews.

[B\. A.W.’s counterclaim]{.casesubsection}

As indicated earlier, A.W. has asserted a counterclaim against plaintiffs. According to A.W., its employee handbook “contains promises that are clear enough that an employee would reasonably believe that an offer of commencing and/or continuing employment has been made.” By continuing to work for A.W. after reviewing the employee handbook, A.W. contends, plaintiffs have accepted the offer to work under the conditions set forth in the handbook. And the handbook, A.W. alleges, requires CCAs “to accurately report all hours worked” so that A.W. can properly bills its clients for the corresponding work of the CCAs. Because plaintiffs allege they engaged in off-the-clock work that they did not report on their timecards, A.W. asserts, they have breached their contractual obligations. Accordingly, A.W. seeks damages from plaintiffs for losses accrued due to A.W.’s asserted inability to bill clients for plaintiffs’ unreported hours.

[Discussion]{.casesection}

[A\. Meijer’s motion to dismiss]{.casesubsection}

Meijer also contends that plaintiffs have not alleged facts sufficient to plausibly show they are entitled to relief. Specifically, Meijer asserts that plaintiffs have not adequately alleged Meijer is a joint employer and therefore do not meet the statutory requirements for liability under the FLSA and the referenced state wage statutes.

The FLSA provides an expansive definition of who qualifies as an employer: “ ‘Employer’ includes any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee.” The state wage laws at issue similarly define “employer” broadly.

Under these definitions, an entity that exercises only indirect control over an employee may still be an employer. The key issue involves the degree of control, and the resolution of that issue is necessarily a “determination that will vary depending on the specific facts of each case.” An entity other than the actual employer may be a joint employer “only if it exerted significant control over the employee.” A joint employer analysis is grounded in the economic realities of the working relationship; the relevant factors include “(1) supervision of employees’ day-to-day activities; (2) authority to hire or fire employees; (3) promulgation of work rules and conditions of employment; (4) issuance of work assignments; and (5) issuance of operating instructions.” Id. This list is not exhaustive; other relevant factors include control of the employee’s work schedule and determination of the rate and method of payment. 

Mapping plaintiffs’ complaint onto the factors listed above, the Court finds that they have alleged facts sufficient to enable a plausible inference that Meijer is their joint employer. For instance, plaintiffs contend that Meijer supervised their daily work performance and promulgated conditions of employment “by reviewing and monitoring CCAs’ calls with Meijer customers and establishing quality assurance standards that they need to follow.” Plaintiffs also assert that they “had to seek permission directly from Meijer’s quality control team before performing certain tasks” like approving large refund requests. Meijer, according to plaintiffs, also monitored their e-mail accounts and provided “scripted emails” to use when assisting Meijer customers. The complaint further contends that Meijer “provides the platform for call distribution, call center reporting, and management of queues for the performance of the CCAs’ work.” These factual contentions, taken together, plausibly support the claim that Meijer is a joint employer of plaintiffs.

Meijer also promulgates “Attendance & Scheduling Guidelines” to which CCAs must adhere. These guidelines state that “[a]ll timecards are reviewed by Meijer management prior to final approval.” They also set forth an attendance policy that outlines a disciplinary structure for absenteeism. Under this attendance policy, Meijer has the right to remove CCAs from the Meijer account. The policy further prescribes the timing of when CCAs may take breaks and the length of those breaks, including the quantity and duration of breaks per shift. Should a CCA wish to take a leave of absence, the request is subject to approval by Meijer. These guidelines also require CCAs on the Meijer account to take a “knowledge test” on the first of every month; “agents are required to take the test by the end of each month.” In addition to knowledge tests, the guidelines also dictate the requirements for attending trainings and meetings: “Trainings and meetings are considered scheduled shifts, and the attendance policy applies. If a meeting or training ends early, agents must complete the scheduled shift time taking calls.” Collectively, these guidelines plausibly support a claim that Meijer is a joint employer with significant control over plaintiffs’ day-to-day activities, including promulgating rules and conditions for their employment and controlling their work schedule.

There are, to be sure, factors that tend to cut against a finding of joint employer status. Plaintiffs provide only conclusory statements regarding Meijer’s control over their rate and method of payment. There are also limited factual allegations specifying the level of control Meijer has over hiring and firing. In a declaration, however, plaintiff Brandt claims that Meijer assigned a “red flag” designation to several of the calls it monitored and that as a result, “Meijer instructed AWC to terminate me.” This contention provides a basis for a plausible inference that Meijer has significant control over disciplining and terminating employees assigned to its account.

Though plaintiffs’ factual allegations are far from determinative on the merits, all that is required at this stage is to nudge their contentions over the plausibility line. Plaintiffs have met this burden. Accordingly, the Court denies Meijer’s motion to dismiss their claims under Rule 12(b)(6).

[B. Plaintiffs’ motion to dismiss A.W.’s counterclaim]{.casesubsection}

Plaintiffs seek dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) on the basis that A.W. is seeking to impermissibly shift to plaintiffs its own duty under the FLSA and state wage statutes to record hours and ensure employees are paid properly for their time. Applying the standard for deciding a Rule 12(b)(6) motion articulated above, the Court concludes that A.W. has failed to state a plausible claim for relief against plaintiffs.

The Supreme Court has held that “FLSA rights cannot be abridged by contract or otherwise waived because this would nullify the purpose of the statute and thwart the legislative policies it was designed to effectuate.” As relevant here, the FLSA states: “Every employer subject to any provision of this chapter or of any order issued under this chapter shall make, keep, and preserve such records of the persons employed by him and of the wages, hours, and other conditions and practices of employment maintained by him ....” 29 U.S.C. § 211(c). The Court has also concluded that the FLSA creates a non-delegable duty on the part of employers “to keep proper records of wages, hours and other conditions and practices of employment,” because they are “in position to know and to produce the most probative facts concerning the nature and amount of work performed.”

A.W. contends that its employee handbook, which all plaintiffs have allegedly agreed to adhere to as a condition of employment, operates as a contract and that any deviation from the handbook’s terms therefore constitutes a breach of contract. In particular, A.W. says that the employee handbook requires all employees to accurately report their hours. Because plaintiffs’ allegations include claims that they were required to work off-the-clock, A.W. claims that plaintiffs breached the handbook by failing to accurately report work they had performed.

A similar fact pattern from a Fourth Circuit case provides helpful guidance here, despite A.W.’s contention that it is inapposite. In _Lyle v. Food Lion, Inc._, 954 F.2d 984 (4th Cir. 1992), two Food Lion employees sought recovery under the FLSA for uncompensated overtime hours. Plaintiffs alleged that Food Lion’s scheduling system assigned specific duties that plaintiffs needed to complete in their authorized hours. Both plaintiffs, however, found the designated duties could not be completed in the authorized time and thus opted to work off-the-clock to avoid disciplinary action. There, as here, Food Lion had a policy “prohibiting hourly employees from working ‘off the clock,’” and there, as here, deviation from this policy was grounds for termination. Food Lion brought a counterclaim against the plaintiffs, alleging in part that they had breached their contracts to the company by violating the policy against off-the-clock work.

The Fourth Circuit affirmed dismissal of the counterclaims, finding that Food Lion was impermissibly seeking “to indemnify itself against plaintiffs for its own violation of the FLSA, which ... is something the FLSA simply will not allow.” The court supported this decision by drawing on jurisprudence from the Fifth Circuit, which similarly noted that “to engraft an indemnity action upon this otherwise comprehensive federal statute would run afoul of the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution’ and ‘would undermine employers’ incentives to abide by the Act.”

A.W. contends that it is not seeking indemnification, but rather lost profits due to its inability to invoice third parties for the CCAs’ claimed off-the-clock work. In other words, according to A.W., it is not seeking “the exact same damages plaintiffs would receive if successful on the FLSA claim,” and accordingly cases like Lyle are inapplicable. This is a distinction without a difference. Under A.W.’s theory, even if it would not be “indemnifying itself” for its statutory violation, it would be profiting from the violation. This is not a viable way around the reasoning in Lyle.

A.W. has not stated a plausible claim. A.W.’s counterclaim is premised on the contention that plaintiffs’ breached a contractual duty to accurately report their hours. Though A.W. may have a policy requiring employees to record all the time they work, it is ultimately A.W.’s statutory duty as employer to ensure that those records are accurate. Attempting to shift that responsibility to plaintiffs seeking recovery of unpaid overtime wages, and in turn seeking to recover the very wages sought by those plaintiffs, contradicts the underlying purpose of the FLSA. Accordingly, the Court grants plaintiffs’ motion to dismiss A.W.’s counterclaim under Rule 12(b)(6).