### Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Non-Compete Clause Rule

#### Federal Trade Commission, 88 FR 3482 (January 19, 2023)

##### I. Overview of the Proposed Rule

A non-compete clause is a contractual term between an employer and a worker that typically blocks the worker from working for a competing employer, or starting a competing business, within a certain geographic area and period of time after the worker's employment ends. Non-compete clauses limit competition by their express terms. As a result, non-compete clauses have always been considered proper subjects for scrutiny under the nation's antitrust laws. In addition, non-compete clauses between employers and workers are traditionally subject to more exacting review under state common law than other contractual terms, due, in part, to concerns about unequal bargaining power between employers and workers and the fact that non-compete clauses limit a worker's ability to practice their trade.

In recent decades, important research has shed light on how the use of non-compete clauses by employers affects competition. Changes in state laws governing non-compete clauses have provided several natural experiments that have allowed researchers to study the impact of non-compete clauses on competition. This research has shown the use of non-compete clauses by employers has negatively affected competition in labor markets, resulting in reduced wages for workers across the labor force—including workers not bound by non-compete clauses. This research has also shown that, by suppressing labor mobility, non-compete clauses have negatively affected competition in product and service markets in several ways.

In this rulemaking, the Commission seeks to ensure competition policy is aligned with the current economic evidence about the consequences of non-compete clauses. In the Commission's view, the existing legal frameworks governing non-compete clauses—formed decades ago, without the benefit of this evidence—allow serious anticompetitive harm to labor, product, and service markets to go unchecked.

Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (“FTC Act”) declares “unfair methods of competition” to be unlawful. Section 5 further directs the Commission “to prevent persons, partnerships, or corporations . . . from using unfair methods of competition in or affecting commerce.” Section 6(g) of the FTC Act authorizes the Commission to “make rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of” the FTC Act, including the Act's prohibition of unfair methods of competition.

Pursuant to Sections 5 and 6(g) of the FTC Act, the Commission proposes the Non-Compete Clause Rule. The proposed rule would provide it is an unfair method of competition—and therefore a violation of Section 5—for an employer to enter into or attempt to enter into a non-compete clause with a worker; maintain with a worker a non-compete clause; or, under certain circumstances, represent to a worker that the worker is subject to a non-compete clause.

The proposed rule would define the term “non-compete clause” as a contractual term between an employer and a worker that prevents the worker from seeking or accepting employment with a person, or operating a business, after the conclusion of the worker's employment with the employer. The proposed rule would also clarify that whether a contractual provision is a non-compete clause would depend not on what the provision is called, but how the provision functions. As the Commission explains below, the definition of non-compete clause would generally not include other types of restrictive employment covenants—such as non-disclosure agreements (“NDAs”) and client or customer non-solicitation agreements—because these covenants generally do not prevent a worker from seeking or accepting employment with a person or operating a business after the conclusion of the worker's employment with the employer. However, under the proposed definition of “non-compete clause,” such covenants would be considered non-compete clauses where they are so unusually broad in scope that they function as such.

The proposed rule would define “employer” as a person \[ ... ] that hires or contracts with a worker to work for the person. The proposed rule would define “worker” as a natural person who works, whether paid or unpaid, for an employer. The proposed rule would clarify that the term “worker” includes an employee, individual classified as an independent contractor, extern, intern, volunteer, apprentice, or sole proprietor who provides a service to a client or customer.

In addition to prohibiting employers from entering into non-compete clauses with workers starting on the rule's compliance date, the proposed rule would require employers to rescind existing non-compete clauses no later than the rule's compliance date. The proposed rule would also require an employer rescinding a non-compete clause to provide notice to the worker that the worker's non-compete clause is no longer in effect. To facilitate compliance, the proposed rule would (1) include model language that would satisfy this notice requirement and (2) establish a safe harbor whereby an employer would satisfy the rule's requirement to rescind existing non-compete clauses where it provides the worker with a notice that complies with this notice requirement.

The proposed rule would include a limited exception for non-compete clauses between the seller and buyer of a business. This exception would only be available where the party restricted by the non-compete clause is an owner, member, or partner holding at least a 25% ownership interest in a business entity. The proposed regulatory text would clarify that non-compete clauses covered by this exception would remain subject to federal antitrust law as well as all other applicable law.

##### II. Factual Background

###### A. What are non-compete clauses?

A non-compete clause is a contractual term between an employer and a worker that prevents the worker from seeking or accepting employment with a person, or operating a business, after the conclusion of the worker's employment with the employer. A typical non-compete clause blocks the worker from working for a competing employer, or starting a competing business, within a certain geographic area and period of time after their employment ends. A non-compete clause may be part of the worker's employment contract or may be contained in a standalone contract. Employers and workers may enter into non-compete clauses at the start of, during, or at the end of a worker's employment.

If a worker violates a non-compete clause, the employer may sue the worker for breach of contract. An employer may be able to obtain a preliminary injunction ordering the worker, for the duration of the lawsuit, to stop the conduct that allegedly violates the non-compete clause. If the employer wins the lawsuit, the employer may be able to obtain a permanent injunction ordering the worker to stop the conduct that violates the non-compete clause; a payment of monetary damages from the worker; or both. Where workers are subject to arbitration clauses, the employer may seek to enforce the non-compete clause through arbitration.

The below examples of non-compete clauses from recent news reports, legal settlements, and court opinions are illustrative.

- A contractual term between a security guard firm and its security guards requiring that, for two years following the conclusion of the security guards' employment with the firm, the security guard may not “\[a-]ccept employment with or be employed by” a competing business “within a one hundred (100) mile radius” of the security guard's primary jobsite with the firm and stating that the security guards may not “\[a-]ssist, aid or in any manner whatsoever help any firm, corporation, partnership or other business to compete with” the firm. The non-compete clause also contains a “liquidated damages” clause requiring the security guard to pay the firm $100,000 as a penalty for any conduct that contravenes the agreement.
- A contractual term between a glass container manufacturing company and its workers typically requiring that, for two years following the conclusion of the worker's employment with the company, the worker may not directly or indirectly “perform or provide the same or substantially similar services” to those the worker performed for the company to any business in the U.S., Canada, or Mexico that is “involved with or that supports the sale, design, development, manufacture, or production of glass containers” in competition with the company.
- A contractual term between a sandwich shop chain and its workers stating that, for two years after the worker leaves their job, the worker may not perform services for “any business which derives more than ten percent (10%) of its revenue from selling submarine, hero-type, deli-style, pita and/or wrapped or rolled sandwiches” located within three miles of any of the chain's more than 2,000 locations in the United States.
- A contractual term between a steelmaker and one of its executives prohibiting the executive from working for “any business engaged directly or indirectly in competition with” the steelmaker anywhere in the world for one year following the termination of the executive's employment.
- A contractual term between an office supply company and one of its sales representatives stating that, for two years after the sales representative's last day of employment, the sales representative is prohibited from “engag\[ing-] directly or indirectly, either personally or as an employee, associate, partner, or otherwise, or by means of any corporation or other legal entity, or otherwise, in any business in competition with Employer,” within a 100-mile radius of the sales representative's employment location.
- A contractual term between a nationwide payday lender and its workers stating that, for one year after the worker leaves their job, they are prohibited from performing any “consumer lending services or money transmission services” for any entity that provides such services, or to “sell products or services that are competitive with or similar to the products or services of the Company,” within a 15-mile radius of any of the payday lender's 1,000 locations in the United States.
- A contractual term between an online retailer and its warehouse workers prohibiting the workers, for 18 months after leaving their job, from “directly or indirectly . . . engag\[ing-] or support\[ing-] the development, manufacture, marketing, or sale of any product or service that competes or is intended to compete with any product or service sold, offered, or otherwise provided by” the retailer—or that is “intended to be sold, offered, or otherwise provided by \[the retailer-] in the future”—that the worker “worked on or supported” or about which the worker obtained or received confidential information.
- A contractual term between a medical services firm and an ophthalmologist stating that, for two years after the termination of the ophthalmologist's employment with the firm, the ophthalmologist shall not engage in the practice of medicine in two Idaho counties unless the ophthalmologist pays the firm a “practice fee” of either $250,000 or $500,000, depending on when the ophthalmologist's employment ends.

In addition to non-compete clauses, other types of contractual provisions restrict what a worker may do after they leave their job. These other types of provisions include, among others:

- Non-disclosure agreements (NDAs)—also known as “confidentiality agreements”—which prohibit the worker from disclosing or using certain information;
- Client or customer non-solicitation agreements, which prohibit the worker from soliciting former clients or customers of the employer (referred to in this NPRM as “non-solicitation agreements”); 
- No-business agreements, which prohibit the worker from doing business with former clients or customers of the employer, whether or not solicited by the worker;
- No-recruit agreements, which prohibit the worker from recruiting or hiring the employer's workers;
- Liquidated damages provisions, which require the worker to pay the employer a sum of money if the worker engages in certain conduct; and
- Training-repayment agreements (TRAs), a type of liquidated damages provision in which the worker agrees to pay the employer for the employer's training expenses if the worker leaves their job before a certain date.

These other types of restrictive employment covenants can sometimes be so broad in scope that they serve as _de facto_ non-compete clauses.

In addition to restricting what workers may do after they leave their jobs, employers have also entered into agreements with other employers in which they agree not to compete for one another's workers. These include no-poach agreements, in which employers agree not to solicit or hire one another's workers, and wage-fixing agreements, in which employers agree to limit wages or salaries (or other terms of compensation).

###### B. Evidence Relating to the Effects of Non-Compete Clauses on Competition

Non-compete clauses have presented challenging legal issues for centuries. But only in the last two decades has empirical evidence emerged to help regulators and the general public understand how non-compete clauses affect competition in labor markets and product and service markets.

In the early 2000s, researchers began to shed new light on the impacts of non-compete clauses on innovation and productivity. As this new body of research was evolving, news reports revealed non-compete clauses were being imposed even on low-wage workers. Researchers responded by applying the tools of economic research to better understand how employers were using non-compete clauses and how they were affecting competition.

###### 1. Labor Markets

The empirical research on how non-compete clauses affect competition shows that the use of non-compete clauses in the aggregate is interfering with competitive conditions in labor markets.

Labor markets function by matching workers and employers. Workers offer their skills and time to employers. In return, employers offer pay, benefits, and job satisfaction. In a well-functioning labor market, a worker who is seeking a better job—more pay, better hours, better working conditions, more enjoyable work, or whatever the worker may be seeking—can enter the labor market by looking for work. Employers who have positions available compete for the worker's services. The worker's current employer may also compete with these prospective employers by seeking to retain the worker—for example, by offering to raise the worker's pay or promote the worker. Ultimately, the worker chooses the job that best meets their objectives. In general, the more jobs available— _i.e.,_ the more options the worker has—the stronger the match the worker will find.

Just as employers compete for workers in a well-functioning labor market, workers compete for jobs. An employer who needs a worker will make it known that the employer has a position available. Workers who learn of the opening will apply for the job. From among the workers who apply, the employer will choose the worker that best meets the employer's needs—in general, the worker most likely to be the most productive. In general, the more workers who are available— _i.e.,_ the more options the employer has—the stronger the match the employer will find.

Through these processes—employers competing for workers, workers competing for jobs, and employers and workers matching with one another—competition in the labor market leads to higher earnings for workers, greater productivity for employers, and better economic conditions.

In a perfectly competitive labor market, if a job that a worker would prefer more—for example, because it has higher pay or is in a better location—were to become available, the worker could switch to it quickly and easily. Due to this ease of switching, in a perfectly competitive labor market, workers would easily match to the optimal job for them. If a worker were to find themselves in a job where the combination of their happiness and productivity is less than in some other job, they would simply switch jobs, making themselves better off.

However, this perfectly competitive labor market exists only in theory. In practice, labor markets deviate substantially from perfect competition. Non-compete clauses, in particular, impair competition in labor markets by restricting a worker's ability to change jobs. If a worker is bound by a non-compete clause, and the worker wants a better job, the non-compete clause will prevent the worker from accepting a new job that is within the scope of the non-compete clause. These are often the most natural alternative employment options for a worker: jobs in the same geographic area and in the worker's field of expertise. For example, a non-compete clause might prevent a nurse in Cleveland from working in the health care field in Northeast Ohio, or a software engineer in Orlando from working for another technology company in Central Florida. The result is less competition among employers for the worker's services and less competition among workers for available jobs. Since the worker is prevented from taking these jobs, the worker may decide not to enter the labor market at all. Or the worker may enter the labor market but take a job in which they are less productive, such as a job outside their field.

Non-compete clauses affect competition in labor markets through their use in the aggregate. The effect of an individual worker's non-compete clause on competition in a particular labor market may be marginal or may be impossible to discern statistically. However, the use of a large number of non-compete clauses across a labor market markedly affects the opportunities of all workers in that market, not just those with non-compete clauses. By making it more difficult for many workers in a labor market to switch to new jobs, non-compete clauses inhibit optimal matches from being made between employers and workers across the labor force. As a result, where non-compete clauses are prevalent in a market, workers are more likely to remain in jobs that are less optimal with respect to the worker's ability to maximize their productive capacity. This materially reduces wages for workers—not only for workers who are subject to non-compete clauses, but for other workers in a labor market as well, since jobs that would otherwise be better matches for an unconstrained worker are filled by workers subject to non-compete clauses.

###### a. Estimates of Non-Compete Clause Use

Based on the available evidence, the Commission estimates that approximately one in five American workers—or approximately 30 million workers—is bound by a non-compete clause.

A 2014 survey of workers by Evan Starr, JJ Prescott, and Norman Bishara, which resulted in 11,505 responses, found 18% of respondents work under a non-compete clause and 38% of respondents have worked under one at some point in their lives.

Starr, Prescott, and Bishara also found, in states where non-compete clauses are unenforceable, workers are covered by non-compete clauses at approximately the same rate as workers in other states. This suggests employers maintain non-compete clauses even where they likely cannot enforce them.

Other estimates of non-compete clause use cover subsets of the U.S. labor force. One study, a 2021 study by Rothstein and Starr, is based on National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data.

Finally, four occupations have been studied individually: executives, physicians, hair stylists, and electrical and electronics engineers. Both Shi (2021) and Kini et al. (2021) estimate prevalence of non-compete clauses for executives. Shi (2021) finds the proportion of executives working under a non-compete clause rose from “57% in the early 1990s to 67% in the mid-2010s.” 

Some observers have stated that the use of non-compete clauses by employers appears to have increased over time. However, there is no consistent data available on the prevalence of non-compete clauses over time.

While many workers are bound by non-compete clauses, many workers do not know whether their non-compete clause is legally enforceable or not. As part of their 2014 survey, Starr et al. asked surveyed individuals “Are noncompetes enforceable in your state?” Of the respondents, 37% indicated that they did not know whether or not their non-compete clause was enforceable.

Starr et al. also find that only 10.1% of workers with non-compete clauses report bargaining over it.

###### b. Earnings—Effects on Workers Across the Labor Force

By inhibiting optimal matches from being made between employers and workers across the labor force, non-compete clauses reduce the earnings of workers. Several studies have found that increased enforceability of non-compete clauses reduces workers' earnings across the labor market generally and for specific types of workers.

Each of the studies described below analyzes the effects of non-compete clause enforceability on earnings. While different studies have defined enforceability of non-compete clauses in slightly different ways, each uses enforceability as a proxy for the chance that a given non-compete clause will be enforced.

These studies use “natural experiments” resulting from changes in state law to assess how changes in the enforceability of non-compete clauses affect workers' earnings. The use of a natural experiment allows for the inference of causal effects, since the likelihood that other variables are driving the outcomes is minimal.

First, a study conducted by Matthew Johnson, Kurt Lavetti, and Michael Lipsitz finds that decreasing non-compete clause enforceability from the approximate enforceability level of the fifth-strictest state to that of the fifth-most-lax state would increase workers' earnings by 3-4%.

The second study of the effects of non-compete clause enforceability on earnings, conducted by Evan Starr, estimates that if a state that does not enforce non-compete clauses shifted its policy to that of the state with an average level of enforceability, earnings would fall by about 4%. Unlike many of the other studies described here, this study does not use a change in enforceability of non-compete clauses to analyze the impact of enforceability. Rather, it examines the differential impact of enforceability on workers in occupations which use non-compete clauses at a high rate versus workers in occupations which use non-compete clauses at a low rate. While the Commission believes that this research design may be less informative with respect to the proposed rule than designs which examine changes in enforceability, the study's estimated effects are in line with the rest of the literature.

The third study, conducted by Michael Lipsitz and Evan Starr, estimates that when Oregon stopped enforcing non-compete clauses for workers who are paid hourly, their wages increased by 2-3%, relative to workers in states which did not experience legal changes. The study also found a greater effect (4.6%) on workers in occupations that used non-compete clauses at a relatively high rate.

The fourth study, conducted by Natarajan Balasubramanian, Jin Woo Chang, Mariko Sakakibara, Jagadeesh Sivadasan, and Evan Starr, found that when Hawaii stopped enforcing non-compete clauses for high-tech workers, earnings of new hires increased by about 4%.

The fifth and sixth studies both show that enforceable non-compete clauses reduce earnings for executives. One study, by Mark Garmaise, finds that decreased enforceability of non-compete clauses increases executives' earnings by 12.7%.

Among the studies listed above, Johnson, Lavetti, and Lipsitz likely has the broadest coverage. The study spans the years 1991 to 2014, examines workers across the labor force, and uses all known common law and statutory changes in non-compete clause enforceability to arrive at its estimates. The study by Starr also covers the entire labor force, from 1996 to 2008. However, the Starr study is only able to compare effects for occupations that use non-compete clauses at a high rate to those that use them at a low rate. The next two studies cover just one legal change, and only a subset of the labor force: hourly workers in Oregon, in the case of Lipsitz and Starr, and high-tech workers in Hawaii, in the case of Balasubramanian et al. Finally, while the studies conducted by Garmaise and Kini et al. examine multiple legal changes, they focus solely on executives.

One limitation of studies of enforceability alone— _i.e.,_ studies which do not consider the use of non-compete clauses—is that it is difficult to disentangle the effects of increased enforceability on workers who are subject to non-compete clauses and workers who are not subject to non-compete clauses. In other words, since effects are observed across the labor force (or some subset of it), they include both effects on workers with and without non-compete clauses. However, due to the research cited in the next subsection—indicating non-compete clauses reduce earnings for workers who are _not_ subject to non-compete clauses—the Commission believes it is reasonable to conclude based on contextual evidence that the labor-force-wide effects described in the studies above include effects on both workers with and without non-compete clauses.

Three additional studies examine the association between non-compete clause use—rather than enforceability—and earnings. Using the 2014 survey described in Part II.B.1.a, Starr et al. find that the use of non-compete clauses is associated with 6.6% higher earnings in the model including the most control variables among those they observe. )

However, the Commission does not believe that studies examining the association between non-compete clause use—rather than enforceability—and earnings are sufficiently probative of the effects of non-compete clauses on earnings. The Commission's concern is that non-compete clause use and earnings may both be determined by one or more confounding factors. It may be the case, for example, that employers who rely most on trade secrets both pay more and use non-compete clauses at a high rate (which would not necessarily be captured by the control variables observed in studies of non-compete clause use). This means these studies do not necessarily inform how restricting the use of non-compete clauses through a rule would impact earnings. This methodological limitation contrasts with studies examining enforceability of non-compete clauses, in which changes in enforceability are “natural experiments” that allow for the inference of causal effects, since the likelihood that other variables are driving the outcomes is minimal. A “natural experiment” refers to some kind of change in the real world that allows researchers to study the impact of the change on an outcome. In a natural experiment, the change is effectively random, uninfluenced by other factors which could have simultaneously affected the outcome. In such situations, it is therefore most likely the change itself caused any impact that is observed on the outcomes.

The belief that studies of non-compete clause use do not reflect causal estimates is shared by the authors of at least one of the studies of non-compete clause use. As noted in Starr et al., “Our analysis of the relationships between noncompete use and labor market outcomes . . . is best taken as descriptive and should not be interpreted causally.”  As a result, the Commission gives these studies minimal weight. The study of physicians conducted by Lavetti et al. partially mitigates this concern by comparing earnings effects in high- versus low-enforceability states, though this analysis compares only California and Illinois, meaning that it is impossible to disentangle underlying differences in those two states from the effects of non-compete clause enforceability.

###### c. Earnings—Effects on Workers Not Covered by Non-Compete Clauses

As described above, non-compete clauses negatively affect competition in labor markets, thereby inhibiting optimal matches from being made between employers and workers across the labor force. As a result, non-compete clauses reduce earnings not only for workers who are subject to non-compete clauses, but also for workers who are not subject to non-compete clauses.

Two studies show non-compete clauses reduce earnings for workers who are not subject to non-compete clauses. The first study, a 2019 study of the external effects of non-compete clauses conducted by Evan Starr, Justin Frake, and Rajshree Agarwal, analyzed workers without non-compete clauses who worked in states and industries in which non-compete clauses were used at a high rate. In effect, this study finds when the use of non-compete clauses by employers increases, that drives down wages for workers who do not have non-compete clauses but who work in the same state and industry. This study also finds this effect is stronger where non-compete clauses are more enforceable.

The Commission notes that, similar to some of the studies described above, this study relies on use of non-compete clauses, as well as cross-sectional differences in enforceability of non-compete clauses, to arrive at their conclusions. While this approach calls into question the causal relationship outlined in the study, the authors employ tests to increase confidence in the causal interpretation; however, the tests rely on what data the authors have available, and therefore cannot rule out explanations outside of the scope of their data. This study also analyzes the effect of non-compete clause use for certain workers on workers in a different firm, meaning that factors simultaneously driving non-compete clause use and outcomes within a certain firm will not break the causal chain identified in the study.

Starr, Frake, and Agarwal show the reduction in earnings (and mobility, discussed below) is due to a reduction in the rate of the arrival of job offers. Individuals in state/industry combinations which use non-compete clauses at a high rate do not receive job offers as frequently as individuals in state/industry combinations where non-compete clauses are not frequently used.

The second study, conducted by Johnson, Lavetti, and Lipsitz, isolates the impact of a state's enforceability policy on workers not directly affected by that policy to demonstrate non-compete clauses affect not just the workers subject to those non-compete clauses, but the broader labor market as well. In particular, the study finds that increases in non-compete clause enforceability in one state have negative impacts on workers' earnings in bordering states, and the effects are nearly as large as the effects in the state in which enforceability changed. Johnson, Lavetti, and Lipsitz estimate that the impact on earnings of a law change in one state on workers just across that state's border is 87% as great as for workers in the state in which the law was changed (the effect tapers off as the distance to the bordering state increases).

###### d. Earnings—Distributional Effects

There is evidence that non-compete clauses increase racial and gender wage gaps by disproportionately reducing the wages of women and non-white workers. This may be, for example, because firms use the monopsony power which results from use of non-compete clauses as a means by which to wage discriminate. The study by Johnson, Lavetti, and Lipsitz finds that while earnings of white men would increase by about 3.2% if a state's enforceability moved from the fifth-strictest to the fifth most lax, the comparable earnings increase for workers in other demographic groups would be 3.7-7.7%, depending on the characteristics of the group (though it is not clear from the study whether or not the differences are statistically significant).

###### e. Job Creation

While non-compete clauses may theoretically incentivize firms to create jobs by increasing the value associated with any given worker covered by a non-compete clause, the evidence is inconclusive. One study, by Gerald Carlino, estimates the job creation rate at startups increased by 7.8% when Michigan increased non-compete clause enforceability. However, the job creation rate calculated in this study is the ratio of jobs created by startups to overall employment in the state: therefore, the job creation rate at startups may rise either because the number of jobs created by startups rose, or because employment overall fell. The study does not investigate which of these two factors drives the increase in the job creation rate at startups.

Another study finds that several increases in non-compete clause enforceability were associated with a 1.4% increase in average per-firm employment at new firms (though not necessarily total employment). In this study, the authors attribute the increase in average employment to a change in the composition of newly founded firms. The increases in non-compete clause enforceability prevented the entry of relatively small startups which would otherwise have existed. Therefore, the firms which entered in spite of increases in non-compete clause enforceability had more workers on average: this increased the average job creation rate at new firms, because the average entering firm was relatively larger. However, if the mechanism identified by the authors is correct, increases in enforceability generate fewer total jobs, because the same number of large firms may enter (regardless of non-compete clause enforceability), but fewer small firms enter.

A similar mechanism may explain the results in both studies above. If that is indeed the case, then an increase in average per-firm employment among startups is not a positive effect of non-compete clause enforceability: instead, it could actually represent a negative effect, since non-compete clauses prevent small firms from existing in the first place, and overall job creation may decrease. The Commission therefore believes, with respect to job creation rates, the evidence is inconclusive.

##### IV. The Commission's Preliminary Determination That Non-Compete Clauses Are an Unfair Method of Competition

The Commission preliminarily determines it is an unfair method of competition for an employer to enter into or attempt to enter into a non-compete clause with a worker; maintain with a worker a non-compete clause; or represent to a worker that the worker is subject to a non-compete clause where the employer has no good faith basis to believe the worker is subject to an enforceable non-compete clause.

###### A. Non-Compete Clauses Are an Unfair Method of Competition Under Section 5

###### 1. Non-Compete Clauses Are Unfair

###### b. Non-Compete Clauses Are Exploitative and Coercive at the Time of Contracting

The Commission preliminarily finds non-compete clauses for workers other than senior executives are exploitative and coercive because they take advantage of unequal bargaining power between employers and workers at the time the employer and worker enter into the non-compete clause.

As noted above, courts have held conduct that is exploitative and coercive can violate Section 5 where it burdens a not insignificant volume of commerce. As another court stated, more recently:

The average, individual employee has little but his labor to sell or to use to make a living. He is often in urgent need of selling it and in no position to object to boiler plate restrictive covenants placed before him to sign. To him, the right to work and support his family is the most important right he possesses. His individual bargaining power is seldom equal to that of his employer. . . . Under pressure of need and with little opportunity for choice, he is more likely than the seller to make a rash, improvident promise that, for the sake of present gain, may tend to impair his power to earn a living, impoverish him, render him a public charge or deprive the community of his skill and training.

Indeed, courts have cited the imbalance of bargaining power between workers and employers as a central reason for imposing stricter scrutiny on non-compete clauses between employers and workers than on non-compete clauses between businesses or between the seller and buyer of a business.

The imbalance of bargaining power between employers and workers results from several factors. Many of these factors relate to the nature of the employer-worker relationship in the United States generally. Most workers depend on income from their jobs to get by—to pay their rent or mortgage, pay their bills, and keep food on the table. For these workers, particularly the many workers who live paycheck to paycheck, loss of a job or a job opportunity can severely damage their finances.

Several additional factors contribute to the imbalance of bargaining power between employers and workers generally. These include the decline in union membership, which forces more workers to negotiate with their employers individually; 

While the employer-worker relationship is defined by an imbalance of bargaining power generally, the imbalance of bargaining power is particularly acute in the context of negotiating employment terms such as non-compete clauses, for several reasons. First, as courts have long recognized, employers are repeat players who are likely to have greater experience and skill at bargaining, in the context of negotiating employment terms, than individual workers. while employers are more likely to seek the assistance of counsel in drafting them.

Third, research indicates consumers exhibit cognitive biases in the way they consider contractual terms, Workers likely display similar cognitive biases in the way they consider employment terms. These reasons explain why the imbalance of bargaining power between workers and employers is particularly high in the context of negotiating employment terms such as non-compete clauses.

There is considerable evidence employers are exploiting this imbalance of bargaining power through the use of non-compete clauses. Non-compete clauses are typically standard-form contracts,

Because there is a considerable imbalance of bargaining power between workers and employers in the context of negotiating employment terms, and because employers take advantage of this imbalance of bargaining power through the use of non-compete clauses, the Commission preliminarily finds non-compete clauses are exploitative and coercive at the time of contracting.

As noted above, for coercive conduct to constitute unfair method of competition, it must also burden a not insignificant volume of commerce. The Commission preliminarily finds non-compete clauses burden a not insignificant volume of commerce due to their negative effects on competitive conditions in labor markets and product and service markets, which are described above.

This preliminary finding does not apply to workers who are senior executives. Non-compete clauses for senior executives are unlikely to be exploitative or coercive at the time of contracting, because senior executives are likely to negotiate the terms of their employment and may often do so with the assistance of counsel. The Commission seeks comment on whether there are other categories of highly paid or highly skilled workers ( _i.e.,_ other than senior executives) to whom this preliminary finding should not apply.

The Commission seeks comment on all aspects of its preliminary finding that non-compete clauses are exploitative and coercive at the time of contracting.

###### c. Non-Compete Clauses Are Exploitative and Coercive at the Time of the Worker's Potential Departure From the Employer

The Commission preliminarily finds non-compete clauses for workers other than senior executives are exploitative and coercive at the time of the worker's potential departure from the employer, because they force a worker to either stay in a job they want to leave or choose an alternative that likely impacts their livelihood.

For most workers who want to leave their jobs, the most natural employment options will be work in the same field and in the same geographic area. However, where a worker is bound by a non-compete clause, the worker's employment options are significantly limited. A worker who is subject to a non-compete clause, and who wants to leave their job, faces an undesirable choice that will likely affect their livelihood: either move out of the area; leave the workforce for a period of time; leave their field for period of time; pay the employer a sum of money to waive the non-compete clause; or violate the non-compete clause and risk a lawsuit from the employer. By forcing a worker who wants to leave their job to either stay in their job or take an action that will likely negatively affect their livelihood, non-compete clauses coerce workers into remaining in their current jobs. Courts have long expressed concern about this coercive effect of non-compete clauses—that non-compete clauses may threaten a worker's livelihood if they leave their job.

Workers have an inalienable right to quit their jobs. Non-compete clauses burden the ability to quit by forcing workers to either remain in their current job or, as described above, take an action—such as leaving the labor force for a period of time or taking a job in a different field—that would likely affect their livelihood. For this reason, the Commission finds non-compete clauses are exploitative and coercive at the time of the worker's potential departure.

As noted above, for coercive conduct to constitute unfair method of competition, it must also burden a not insignificant volume of commerce. The Commission preliminarily finds non-compete clauses burden a not insignificant volume of commerce due to their negative effects on competitive conditions in labor markets and product and service markets, which are described above.

This preliminary finding does not apply to workers who are senior executives. Non-compete clauses for senior executives are unlikely to be exploitative or coercive at the time of the executive's departure. Because many senior executives negotiate their non-compete clauses with the assistance of expert counsel, they are likely to have bargained for a higher wage or more generous severance package in exchange for agreeing to the non-compete clause. The Commission seeks comment on whether there are other categories of highly paid or highly skilled workers ( _i.e.,_ other than senior executives) to whom this preliminary finding should not apply.

###### B. The Justifications for Non-Compete Clauses Do Not Alter the Commission's Preliminary Determination

###### 1. Commonly Cited Justifications for Non-Compete Clauses

The most cited justifications for non-compete clauses are that they increase employers' incentive to make productive investments, including in worker training, client attraction, or in creating or sharing trade secrets with workers. According to these justifications, without non-compete clauses, employment relationships are subject to an investment hold-up problem. Investment hold-up occurs where an employer—faced with the possibility a worker may depart after receiving some sort of valuable investment—opts not to make that investment in the first place, thereby decreasing the firm's productivity and overall social welfare. For example, according to these justifications, an employer may be more reticent to invest in trade secrets or other confidential information; to share this information with its workers; or to train its workers if it knows the worker may depart for or may establish a competing firm. Courts have cited these justifications when upholding non-compete clauses under state common law or antitrust law.

\[T]here is evidence non-compete clauses increase worker training and capital investment ( _e.g.,_ investment in physical assets, such as machines). Non-compete clauses may increase an employer's incentive to train their workers or invest in capital equipment because workers bound by non-compete clauses are less likely to leave their jobs for competitors. The author of the study assessing effects on capital investment finds there are likely two mechanisms driving these effects. First, firms may be more likely to invest in capital when they train their workers because worker training and capital expenditure are complementary ( _i.e.,_ the return on investment in capital equipment is greater when workers are more highly trained). Second, non-compete clauses reduce competition, and firms' returns to capital expenditure are greater when competition is lower, incentivizing firms to invest more in capital.

###### 2. Employers Have Alternatives to Non-Compete Clauses for Protecting Valuable Investments

There are two reasons why the business justifications for non-compete clauses do not alter the Commission's preliminary determination non-compete clauses are an unfair method of competition. The first is employers have alternatives to non-compete clauses for protecting valuable investments. These alternatives may not be as protective as employers would like, but they reasonably accomplish the same purposes as non-compete clauses while burdening competition to a less significant degree.

As noted above, the most commonly cited justifications for non-compete clauses are that they increase an employer's incentive to make productive investments—such as investing in trade secrets or other confidential information, sharing this information with its workers, or training its workers—because employers may be more likely to make such investments if they know workers are not going to depart for or establish a competing firm. However, non-compete clauses restrict considerably more activity than necessary to achieve these benefits. Rather than restraining a broad scope of beneficial competitive activity—by barring workers altogether from leaving work with the employer for a competitor and starting a business that would compete with the employer—employers have alternatives for protecting valuable investments that are much more narrowly tailored to limit impacts on competitive conditions. These alternatives restrict a considerably smaller scope of beneficial competitive activity than non-compete clauses because—while they may restrict an employee's ability to use or disclose certain information—they generally do not prevent workers from working for a competitor or starting their own business altogether.

[The alternatives discussed include trade secret law, non-disclosure agreements, fixed duration employment contracts, pay increases, and improvements in working conditions.]