---
layout: casebook
chapter-number: 9
title: Enforcing Employee Rights
---

<p class="chapter-number">Chapter 9</p>

# Enforcing Employee Rights

## Public Enforcement 

Federal labor and employment laws typically vest a designated government agency with regulatory and enforcement authority. Agencies may be authorized to conduct routine inspections, investigate alleged violations, or pursue actions against employers in an administrative proceeding, civil suit, or criminal prosecution.[^Enforcement1] 

[^Enforcement1]: _See, e.g._ Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 216(a): "Any person who willfully violates any of the provisions of section 215 of this title shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than $10,000, or to imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. No person shall be imprisoned under this subsection except for an offense committed after the conviction of such person for a prior offense under this subsection." 

### Exclusive Agency Enforcement

Some statutes vest an administrative agency with exclusive authority to commence legal action for alleged violations, and provide for administrative adjudication (subject to judicial review), rather than a civil suit, in contested cases. 

For example, if someone[^Enforcement2] believes an employer or labor union has committed an unfair labor practice under NLRA Section 8, they may file a ULP charge with the appropriate NLRB Regional Director. If the Regional Director concludes that the charge merits formal action, they will issue a complaint and the matter will go to a hearing before an administrative law judge. [29 U.S. Code § 160](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/160). The ALJ's decision is subject to review by the full NLRB. Final orders of the NLRB are in turn subject to judicial review "in any United States court of appeals in the circuit wherein the unfair labor practice in question was alleged to have been engaged in or wherein such person resides or transacts business, or in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia". [29 U.S. Code § 160(f)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/160). The Board may also petition the Court of Appeals for enforcement of its orders. [29 U.S. Code § 160(e)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/160).

[^Enforcement2]: 
  {-} ULP charges are typically filed by an employee, union, or employer whose interests are affected by the alleged violation. However, there is no standing requirement for filing a ULP charge and anyone may do so. 
 
Similarly, under the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Secretary of Labor has exclusive authority to issue citations and assess penalties for violations. [29 U.S. Code § 658](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/658); [29 U.S. Code § 659(a) & (b)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/659). If an employer contests a citation, the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission, [29 U.S. Code § 661](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/661) will conduct a hearing and "issue an order, based on findings of fact, affirming, modifying, or vacating the Secretary's citation or proposed penalty, or directing other appropriate relief". [29 U.S. Code § 659(c)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/659). The Commission's order are subject to judicial review "in any United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the violation is alleged to have occurred or where the employer has its principal office, or in the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" [29 U.S. Code § 660](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/660). 


### Dual Enforcement

Other statutes authorize both public enforcement and private suits by affected employees. 

For example, the Fair Labor Standards Act authorizes the Secretary of Labor to "bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover the amount of unpaid minimum wages or overtime compensation and an equal amount as liquidated damages," which the agency will then pay to the affected employees. [29 U.S.C. § 216(b)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/29/216). The Department of Labor Wage & Hour Division may also assess civil money penalties against employers for child labor violations and for repeat or willful minimum wage and overtime violations. 29 U.S.C. § 216(e). 

Similarly, under Title VII, when an employee files a charge of unlawful employment practices with the EEOC, "if the Commission determines after [ ... ] investigation that there is reasonable cause to believe that the charge is true, the Commission shall endeavor to eliminate any such alleged unlawful employment practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion." [42 U.S.C. § 2000e–5(b)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/2000e-5). If that effort is unsuccessful, the EEOC may bring a suit against the employer (or, in the case of a charge against a government entity, refer the matter to the U.S. Attorney General). [42 U.S.C. § 2000e–5(f)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/2000e-5). 


## Private Enforcement

### Civil Suits

Many employment laws authorize civil suits by employees. Such laws typically provide for recovery of attorney's fees, and sometimes statutory or punitive damages, in addition to actual damages. _See, e.g._ Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 216(b) (authorizing suits by "the employee or employees affected" to recover "the amount of their unpaid minimum wages, or their unpaid overtime compensation," plus "an additional equal amount as liquidated damages," and "a reasonable attorney's fee to be paid by the defendant, and costs of the action.").

## Administrative Prerequisite

Some employment laws have an administrative procedure that employees must satisfy before filing a suit. For example, under Title VII, an employee must first file a charge with the EEOC (or analogous state agency), which then has 180 days to investigate the charge and notify the employee of its determination. [42 U.S.C. § 2000e–5(b)](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/2000e-5). If the EEOC dismisses the charge, or if it does not bring a suit, it will notify the employee that they may bring a suit. 

## Administrative Adjudication

Under state unemployment and workers' compensation laws (and similar federal programs, e.g. [Federal Employees' Compensation Act](https://www.dol.gov/agencies/owcp/FECA/about); [Black Lung Benefits Act](https://www.dol.gov/agencies/owcp/dcmwc); [Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act](https://www.dol.gov/agencies/owcp/dlhwc); [Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act](https://www.dol.gov/agencies/owcp/energy/about)), an employee must file a claim for benefits with the appropriate administrative agency. Adjudication of disputed claims is within the exclusive original jurisidiction of an administrative tribunal (subject to judicial review). 

## Arbitration

### Labor Arbitration 

#### United Steelworkers of America v. Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co., 363 U.S. 574 (1960)

##### Opinion of the Court by MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS, announced by MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN.

Respondent transports steel and steel products by barge and maintains a terminal at Chickasaw, Alabama, where it performs maintenance and repair work on its barges. The employees at that terminal constitute a bargaining unit covered by a collective bargaining agreement negotiated by petitioner union. Respondent between 1956 and 1958 laid off some employees, reducing the bargaining unit from 42 to 23 men. This reduction was due in part to respondent contracting maintenance work, previously done by its employees, to other companies. The latter used respondent's supervisors to lay out the work and hired some of the laid-off employees of respondent (at reduced wages). Some were in fact assigned to work on respondent's barges. A number of employees signed a grievance which petitioner presented to respondent, the grievance reading:

> We are hereby protesting the Company's actions, of arbitrarily and unreasonably contracting out work to other concerns, that could and previously has been performed by Company employees.

> This practice becomes unreasonable, unjust and discriminatory in lieu _sic_ of the fact that at present there are a number of employees that have been laid off for about 1 and 1/2 years or more for allegedly lack of work.
> 
> Confronted with these facts we charge that the Company is in violation of the contract by inducing a partial lock-out, of a number of the employees who would otherwise be working were it not for this unfair practice.

The collective agreement had both a "no strike" and a "no lockout" provision. It also had a grievance procedure which provided in relevant part as follows;

> Issues which conflict with any Federal statute in its application as established by Court procedure or matters which are strictly a function of management shall not be subject to arbitration under this section.
> 
> Should differences arise between the Company and the Union or its members employed by the Company as to the meaning and application of the provisions of this Agreement, or should any local trouble of any kind arise, there shall be no suspension of work on account of such differences but an earnest effort shall be made to settle such differences immediately in the following manner:
> 
> A\. For Maintenance Employees:
> 
> First, between the aggrieved employees, and the Foreman involved;
> 
> Second, between a member or members of the Grievance Committee designated by the Union, and the Foreman and Master Mechanic.
> 
> Fifth, if agreement has not been reached the matter shall be referred to an impartial umpire for decision. The parties shall meet to decide on an umpire acceptable to both. If no agreement on selection of an umpire is reached, the parties shall jointly petition the United States Conciliation Service for suggestion of a list of umpires from which selection will be made. The decision of the umpire shall be final.

Settlement of this grievance was not had and respondent refused arbitration. This suit was then commenced by the union to compel it.[^Warrior1]

We held in _Textile Workers v. Lincoln Mills,_ 353 U. S. 448, that a grievance arbitration provision in a collective agreement could be enforced by reason of § 301 (a) of the Labor Management Relations Act and that the policy to be applied in enforcing this type of arbitration was that reflected in our national labor laws. The present federal policy is to promote industrial stabilization through the collective bargaining agreement.[^Warrior3] A major factor in achieving industrial peace is the inclusion of a provision for arbitration of grievances in the collective bargaining agreement.[^Warrior4]

Thus the run of arbitration cases, illustrated by _Wilko v. Swan,_ 346 U. S. 427 (1953),[^Warrior5] becomes irrelevant to our problem. There the choice is between the adjudication of cases or controversies in courts with established procedures or even special statutory safeguards on the one hand and the settlement of them in the more informal arbitration tribunal on the other. In the commercial case, arbitration is the substitute for litigation. Here arbitration is the substitute for industrial strife. Since arbitration of labor disputes has quite different functions from arbitration under an ordinary commercial agreement, the hostility evinced by courts toward arbitration of commercial agreements has no place here. For arbitration of labor disputes under collective bargaining agreements is part and parcel of the collective bargaining process itself.

The collective bargaining agreement states the rights and duties of the parties. It is more than a contract; it is a generalized code to govern a myriad of cases which the draftsmen cannot wholly anticipate. The collective agreement covers the whole employment relationship. It calls into being a new common law—the common law of a particular industry or of a particular plant. As one observer has put it:

> It is not unqualifiedly true that a collective-bargaining agreement is simply a document by which the union and employees have imposed upon management limited, express restrictions of its otherwise absolute right to manage the enterprise, so that an employee's claim must fail unless he can point to a specific contract provision upon which the claim is founded. There are too many people, too many problems, too many unforeseeable contingencies to make the words of the contract the exclusive source of rights and duties. One cannot reduce all the rules governing a community like an industrial plant to fifteen or even fifty pages. Within the sphere of collective bargaining, the institutional characteristics and the governmental nature of the collective-bargaining process demand a common law of the shop which implements and furnishes the context of the agreement. We must assume that intelligent negotiators acknowledged so plain a need unless they stated a contrary rule in plain words.

A collective bargaining agreement is an effort to erect a system of industrial self-government. When most parties enter into contractual relationship they do so voluntarily, in the sense that there is no real compulsion to deal with one another, as opposed to dealing with other parties. This is not true of the labor agreement. The choice is generally not between entering or refusing to enter into a relationship, for that in all probability preexists the negotiations. Rather it is between having that relationship governed by an agreed-upon rule of law or leaving each and every matter subject to a temporary resolution dependent solely upon the relative strength, at any given moment, of the contending forces. The mature labor agreement may attempt to regulate all aspects of the complicated relationship, from the most crucial to the most minute over an extended period of time. Because of the compulsion to reach agreement and the breadth of the matters covered, as well as the need for a fairly concise and readable instrument, the product of negotiations (the written document) is, in the words of the late Dean Shulman, "a compilation of diverse provisions: some provide objective criteria almost automatically applicable; some provide more or less specific standards which require reason and judgment in their application; and some do little more than leave problems to future consideration with an expression of hope and good faith." Gaps may be left to be filled in by reference to the practices of the particular industry and of the various shops covered by the agreement. Many of the specific practices which underlie the agreement may be unknown, except in hazy form, even to the negotiators. Courts and arbitration in the context of most commercial contracts are resorted to because there has been a breakdown in the working relationship of the parties; such resort is the unwanted exception. But the grievance machinery under a collective bargaining agreement is at the very heart of the system of industrial self-government. Arbitration is the means of solving the unforeseeable by molding a system of private law for all the problems which may arise and to provide for their solution in a way which will generally accord with the variant needs and desires of the parties. The processing of disputes through the grievance machinery is actually a vehicle by which meaning and content are given to the collective bargaining agreement.

Apart from matters that the parties specifically exclude, all of the questions on which the parties disagree must therefore come within the scope of the grievance and arbitration provisions of the collective agreement. The grievance procedure is, in other words, a part of the continuous collective bargaining process. It, rather than a strike, is the terminal point of a disagreement.

The labor arbitrator performs functions which are not normal to the courts; the considerations which help him fashion judgments may indeed be foreign to the competence of courts.

> A proper conception of the arbitrator's function is basic. He is not a public tribunal imposed upon the parties by superior authority which the parties are obliged to accept. He has no general charter to administer justice for a community which transcends the parties. He is rather part of a system of self-government created by and confined to the parties. 

The labor arbitrator's source of law is not confined to the express provisions of the contract, as the industrial common law—the practice of the industry and the shop—is equally a part of the collective bargaining agreement although not expressed in it. The labor arbitrator is usually chosen because of the parties' confidence in his knowledge of the common law of the shop and their trust in his personal judgment to bring to bear considerations which are not expressed in the contract as criteria for judgment. The parties expect that his judgment of a particular grievance will reflect not only what the contract says but, insofar as the collective bargaining agreement permits, such factors as the effect upon productivity of a particular result, its consequence to the morale of the shop, his judgment whether tensions will be heightened or diminished. For the parties' objective in using the arbitration process is primarily to further their common goal of uninterrupted production under the agreement, to make the agreement serve their specialized needs. The ablest judge cannot be expected to bring the same experience and competence to bear upon the determination of a grievance, because he cannot be similarly informed.

The Congress, however, has by § 301 of the Labor Management Relations Act, assigned the courts the duty of determining whether the reluctant party has breached his promise to arbitrate. For arbitration is a matter of contract and a party cannot be required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he has not agreed so to submit. Yet, to be consistent with congressional policy in favor of settlement of disputes by the parties through the machinery of arbitration, the judicial inquiry under § 301 must be strictly confined to the question whether the reluctant party did agree to arbitrate the grievance or did agree to give the arbitrator power to make the award he made. An order to arbitrate the particular grievance should not be denied unless it may be said with positive assurance that the arbitration clause is not susceptible of an interpretation that covers the asserted dispute. Doubts should be resolved in favor of coverage.

We do not agree with the lower courts that contracting-out grievances were necessarily excepted from the grievance procedure of this agreement. To be sure, the agreement provides that "matters which are strictly a function of management shall not be subject to arbitration." But it goes on to say that if "differences" arise or if "any local trouble of any kind" arises, the grievance procedure shall be applicable.

Collective bargaining agreements regulate or restrict the exercise of management functions; they do not oust management from the performance of them. Management hires and fires, pays and promotes, supervises and plans. All these are part of its function, and absent a collective bargaining agreement, it may be exercised freely except as limited by public law and by the willingness of employees to work under the particular, unilaterally imposed conditions. A collective bargaining agreement may treat only with certain specific practices, leaving the rest to management but subject to the possibility of work stoppages. When, however, an absolute no-strike clause is included in the agreement, then in a very real sense everything that management does is subject to the agreement, for either management is prohibited or limited in the action it takes, or if not, it is protected from interference by strikes. This comprehensive reach of the collective bargaining agreement does not mean, however, that the language, "strictly a function of management," has no meaning.

"Strictly a function of management" might be thought to refer to any practice of management in which, under particular circumstances prescribed by the agreement, it is permitted to indulge. But if courts, in order to determine arbitrability, were allowed to determine what is permitted and what is not, the arbitration clause would be swallowed up by the exception. Every grievance in a sense involves a claim that management has violated some provision of the agreement.

Accordingly, "strictly a function of management" must be interpreted as referring only to that over which the contract gives management complete control and unfettered discretion. Respondent claims that the contracting out of work falls within this category. Contracting out work is the basis of many grievances; and that type of claim is grist in the mills of the arbitrators. A specific collective bargaining agreement may exclude contracting out from the grievance procedure. Or a written collateral agreement may make clear that contracting out was not a matter for arbitration. In such a case a grievance based solely on contracting out would not be arbitrable. Here, however, there is no such provision. Nor is there any showing that the parties designed the phrase "strictly a function of management" to encompass any and all forms of contracting out. In the absence of any express provision excluding a particular grievance from arbitration, we think only the most forceful evidence of a purpose to exclude the claim from arbitration can prevail, particularly where, as here, the exclusion clause is vague and the arbitration clause quite broad. Since any attempt by a court to infer such a purpose necessarily comprehends the merits, the court should view with suspicion an attempt to persuade it to become entangled in the construction of the substantive provisions of a labor agreement, even through the back door of interpreting the arbitration clause, when the alternative is to utilize the services of an arbitrator.

The grievance alleged that the contracting out was a violation of the collective bargaining agreement. There was, therefore, a dispute "as to the meaning and application of the provisions of this Agreement" which the parties had agreed would be determined by arbitration.

The judiciary sits in these cases to bring into operation an arbitral process which substitutes a regime of peaceful settlement for the older regime of industrial conflict. Whether contracting out in the present case violated the agreement is the question. It is a question for the arbiter, not for the courts.


[^Warrior1]: (n.1 in opinion) Section 301(a) of the Labor Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 185(a), provides:

	"Suits for violation of contracts between an employer and a labor organization representing employees in an industry affecting commerce as defined in this Act, or between any such labor organizations, may be brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties, without respect to the amount in controversy or without regard to the citizenship of the parties." 

[^Warrior3]: (n.3 in opinion) In § 8 (d) of the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 158(d), Congress indeed provided that where there was a collective agreement for a fixed term the duty to bargain did not require either party "to discuss or agree to any modification of the terms and conditions contained in" the contract. 

[^Warrior4]: (n.4 in opinion) Complete effectuation of the federal policy is achieved when the agreement contains both an arbitration provision for all unresolved grievances and an absolute prohibition of strikes, the arbitration agreement being the _"quid pro quo"_ for the agreement not to strike. 


[^Warrior5]: 
  {-} _Wilko v. Swan_ was a suit by a customer of a securities brokerage firm, alleging that the firm fraudulently induced the plaintiff to purchase some stock. The Court held that a predispute arbitration agreement was invalid where the dispute involved issued arising under the Securities Act of 1933. In _Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Exp., Inc._ 490 U.S. 477 (1989), the Court overruled _Wilko_ and held that predispute agreements to arbitrate claims under the Securities Act are enforceable. 


#### United Steelworkers of America v. Enterprise Wheel & Car Corp., 363 U.S. 593 (1960)

##### Opinion of the Court by MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS, announced by MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN.

Petitioner union and respondent during the period relevant here had a collective bargaining agreement which provided that any differences "as to the meaning and application" of the agreement should be submitted to arbitration and that the arbitrator's decision "shall be final and binding on the parties." Special provisions were included concerning the suspension and discharge of employees. The agreement stated:

> Should it be determined by the Company or by an arbitrator in accordance with the grievance procedure that the employee has been suspended unjustly or discharged in violation of the provisions of this Agreement, the Company shall reinstate the employee and pay full compensation at the employee's regular rate of pay for the time lost.

The agreement also provided:

> It is understood and agreed that neither party will institute _civil suits or legal proceedings_ against the other for alleged violation of any of the provisions of this labor contract; instead all disputes will be settled in the manner outlined in this Article III—Adjustment of Grievances.

A group of employees left their jobs in protest against the discharge of one employee. A union official advised them at once to return to work. An official of respondent at their request gave them permission and then rescinded it. The next day they were told they did not have a job any more "until this thing was settled one way or the other."

A grievance was filed; and when respondent finally refused to arbitrate, this suit was brought for specific enforcement of the arbitration provisions of the agreement. The District Court ordered arbitration. The arbitrator found that the discharge of the men was not justified, though their conduct, he said, was improper. In his view the facts warranted at most a suspension of the men for 10 days each. After their discharge and before the arbitration award the collective bargaining agreement had expired. The union, however, continued to represent the workers at the plant. The arbitrator rejected the contention that expiration of the agreement barred reinstatement of the employees. He held that the provision of the agreement above quoted imposed an unconditional obligation on the employer. He awarded reinstatement with back pay, minus pay for a 10-day suspension and such sums as these employees received from other employment.

Respondent refused to comply with the award. Petitioner moved the District Court for enforcement. The District Court directed respondent to comply. The Court of Appeals, while agreeing that the District Court had jurisdiction to enforce an arbitration award under a collective bargaining agreement, held that the failure of the award to specify the amounts to be deducted from the back pay rendered the award unenforceable. That defect, it agreed, could be remedied by requiring the parties to complete the arbitration. It went on to hold, however, that an award for back pay subsequent to the date of termination of the collective bargaining agreement could not be enforced. It also held that the requirement for reinstatement of the discharged employees was likewise unenforceable because the collective bargaining agreement had expired.

The refusal of courts to review the merits of an arbitration award is the proper approach to arbitration under collective bargaining agreements. The federal policy of settling labor disputes by arbitration would be undermined if courts had the final say on the merits of the awards. As we stated in _United Steelworkers of America v. Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co._, decided this day, the arbitrators under these collective agreements are indispensable agencies in a continuous collective bargaining process. They sit to settle disputes at the plant level—disputes that require for their solution knowledge of the custom and practices of a particular factory or of a particular industry as reflected in particular agreements.[^EnterpriseWheel2]

When an arbitrator is commissioned to interpret and apply the collective bargaining agreement, he is to bring his informed judgment to bear in order to reach a fair solution of a problem. This is especially true when it comes to formulating remedies. There the need is for flexibility in meeting a wide variety of situations. The draftsmen may never have thought of what specific remedy should be awarded to meet a particular contingency. Nevertheless, an arbitrator is confined to interpretation and application of the collective bargaining agreement; he does not sit to dispense his own brand of industrial justice. He may of course look for guidance from many sources, yet his award is legitimate only so long as it draws its essence from the collective bargaining agreement. When the arbitrator's words manifest an infidelity to this obligation, courts have no choice but to refuse enforcement of the award.

The opinion of the arbitrator in this case, as it bears upon the award of back pay beyond the date of the agreement's expiration and reinstatement, is ambiguous. It may be read as based solely upon the arbitrator's view of the requirements of enacted legislation, which would mean that he exceeded the scope of the submission. Or it may be read as embodying a construction of the agreement itself, perhaps with the arbitrator looking to "the law" for help in determining the sense of the agreement. A mere ambiguity in the opinion accompanying an award, which permits the inference that the arbitrator may have exceeded his authority, is not a reason for refusing to enforce the award. Arbitrators have no obligation to the court to give their reasons for an award. To require opinions free of ambiguity may lead arbitrators to play it safe by writing no supporting opinions. This would be undesirable for a well-reasoned opinion tends to engender confidence in the integrity of the process and aids in clarifying the underlying agreement. Moreover, we see no reason to assume that this arbitrator has abused the trust the parties confided in him and has not stayed within the areas marked out for his consideration. It is not apparent that he went beyond the submission. The Court of Appeals' opinion refusing to enforce the reinstatement and partial back pay portions of the award was not based upon any finding that the arbitrator did not premise his award on his construction of the contract. It merely disagreed with the arbitrator's construction of it.

The collective bargaining agreement could have provided that if any of the employees were wrongfully discharged, the remedy would be reinstatement and back pay up to the date they were returned to work. Respondent's major argument seems to be that by applying correct principles of law to the interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement it can be determined that the agreement did not so provide, and that therefore the arbitrator's decision was not based upon the contract. The acceptance of this view would require courts, even under the standard arbitration clause, to review the merits of every construction of the contract. This plenary review by a court of the merits would make meaningless the provisions that the arbitrator's decision is final, for in reality it would almost never be final. This underlines the fundamental error which we have alluded to in _United Steelworkers of America v. American Manufacturing Co._, decided this day. As we there emphasized, the question of interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement is a question for the arbitrator. It is the arbitrator's construction which was bargained for; and so far as the arbitrator's decision concerns construction of the contract, the courts have no business overruling him because their interpretation of the contract is different from his.


[^EnterpriseWheel2]: (n.2 in opinion) "Persons unfamiliar with mills and factories—farmers or professors, for example—often remark upon visiting them that they seem like another world. This is particularly true if, as in the steel industry, both tradition and technology have strongly and uniquely molded the ways men think and act when at work. The newly hired employee, the 'green hand,' is gradually initiated into what amounts to a miniature society. There he finds himself in a strange environment that assaults his senses with unusual sounds and smells and often with different 'weather conditions' such as sudden drafts of heat, cold, or humidity. He discovers that the society of which he only gradually becomes a part has of course a formal government of its own—the rules which management and the union have laid down—but that it also differs from or parallels the world outside in social classes, folklore, ritual, and traditions.

	"Under the process in the old mills a very real 'miniature society' had grown up, and in important ways the technological revolution described in this case history shattered it. But a new society or work community was born immediately, though for a long time it developed slowly. As the old society was strongly molded by the _discontinuous_ process of making pipe, so was the new one molded by the _continuous_ process and strongly influenced by the characteristics of new highspeed automatic equipment." Walker, Life in the Automatic Factory, 36 Harv. Bus. Rev. 111, 117.


### Individual Employment Arbitration 

#### Federal Arbitration Act, 9 U.S. Code §§ 1 et seq.

<div class="legal-code">

##### § 2 - Validity, irrevocability, and enforcement of agreements to arbitrate

A written provision in any maritime transaction or a contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter arising out of such contract or transaction, or the refusal to perform the whole or any part thereof, or an agreement in writing to submit to arbitration an existing controversy arising out of such a contract, transaction, or refusal, shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract or as otherwise provided in chapter 4.


##### § 3 - Stay of proceedings where issue therein referable to arbitration

If any suit or proceeding be brought in any of the courts of the United States upon any issue referable to arbitration under an agreement in writing for such arbitration, the court in which such suit is pending, upon being satisfied that the issue involved in such suit or proceeding is referable to arbitration under such an agreement, shall on application of one of the parties stay the trial of the action until such arbitration has been had in accordance with the terms of the agreement, providing the applicant for the stay is not in default in proceeding with such arbitration.


##### § 4 - Failure to arbitrate under agreement; petition to United States court having jurisdiction for order to compel arbitration; notice and service thereof; hearing and determination

A party aggrieved by the alleged failure, neglect, or refusal of another to arbitrate under a written agreement for arbitration may petition any United States district court which, save for such agreement, would have jurisdiction under title 28, in a civil action or in admiralty of the subject matter of a suit arising out of the controversy between the parties, for an order directing that such arbitration proceed in the manner provided for in such agreement. Five days' notice in writing of such application shall be served upon the party in default. Service thereof shall be made in the manner provided by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The court shall hear the parties, and upon being satisfied that the making of the agreement for arbitration or the failure to comply therewith is not in issue, the court shall make an order directing the parties to proceed to arbitration in accordance with the terms of the agreement. The hearing and proceedings, under such agreement, shall be within the district in which the petition for an order directing such arbitration is filed. If the making of the arbitration agreement or the failure, neglect, or refusal to perform the same be in issue, the court shall proceed summarily to the trial thereof. If no jury trial be demanded by the party alleged to be in default, or if the matter in dispute is within admiralty jurisdiction, the court shall hear and determine such issue. Where such an issue is raised, the party alleged to be in default may, except in cases of admiralty, on or before the return day of the notice of application, demand a jury trial of such issue, and upon such demand the court shall make an order referring the issue or issues to a jury in the manner provided by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, or may specially call a jury for that purpose. If the jury find that no agreement in writing for arbitration was made or that there is no default in proceeding thereunder, the proceeding shall be dismissed. If the jury find that an agreement for arbitration was made in writing and that there is a default in proceeding thereunder, the court shall make an order summarily directing the parties to proceed with the arbitration in accordance with the terms thereof.

##### § 5 - Appointment of arbitrators or umpire

If in the agreement provision be made for a method of naming or appointing an arbitrator or arbitrators or an umpire, such method shall be followed; but if no method be provided therein, or if a method be provided and any party thereto shall fail to avail himself of such method, or if for any other reason there shall be a lapse in the naming of an arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire, or in filling a vacancy, then upon the application of either party to the controversy the court shall designate and appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators or umpire, as the case may require, who shall act under the said agreement with the same force and effect as if he or they had been specifically named therein; and unless otherwise provided in the agreement the arbitration shall be by a single arbitrator.

##### § 9 - Award of arbitrators; confirmation; jurisdiction; procedure

If the parties in their agreement have agreed that a judgment of the court shall be entered upon the award made pursuant to the arbitration, and shall specify the court, then at any time within one year after the award is made any party to the arbitration may apply to the court so specified for an order confirming the award, and thereupon the court must grant such an order unless the award is vacated, modified, or corrected as prescribed in sections 10 and 11 of this title. If no court is specified in the agreement of the parties, then such application may be made to the United States court in and for the district within which such award was made. Notice of the application shall be served upon the adverse party, and thereupon the court shall have jurisdiction of such party as though he had appeared generally in the proceeding. If the adverse party is a resident of the district within which the award was made, such service shall be made upon the adverse party or his attorney as prescribed by law for service of notice of motion in an action in the same court. If the adverse party shall be a nonresident, then the notice of the application shall be served by the marshal of any district within which the adverse party may be found in like manner as other process of the court.

##### § 10 - Same; vacation; grounds; rehearing

(a\) In any of the following cases the United States court in and for the district wherein the award was made may make an order vacating the award upon the application of any party to the arbitration—

> (1\) where the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or undue means;
> 
> (2\) where there was evident partiality or corruption in the arbitrators, or either of them;
> 
> (3\) where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone the hearing, upon sufficient cause shown, or in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material to the controversy; or of any other misbehavior by which the rights of any party have been prejudiced; or
> 
> (4\) where the arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly executed them that a mutual, final, and definite award upon the subject matter submitted was not made.

(b\) If an award is vacated and the time within which the agreement required the award to be made has not expired, the court may, in its discretion, direct a rehearing by the arbitrators.

(c\) \[omitted.]



</div>

---

##### Note on Federal Arbitration Act 

The Federal Arbitration Act ("FAA"), enacted in 1926, establishes a framework for judicial enforcement of contractual arbitration agreements and limited judicial review of arbitration awards. The FAA applies to most employment contracts, except "contracts of employment of seamen, railroad employees, or any other class of workers engaged in foreign or interstate commerce." That exception applies to "workers directly involved in transporting goods across state or international borders," _Southwest Airlines Co. v. Saxon_, 142 S. Ct. 1783, 1783 (2022) whether they are hired as employees or as independent contractors. _New Prime, Inc. v. Oliveira_, 139 S. Ct. 532 (2021).

---


#### Epic Systems Corp. v. Lewis, 138 S.Ct. 1612 (2018)

##### Justice GORSUCH delivered the opinion of the Court.

Should employees and employers be allowed to agree that any disputes between them will be resolved through one-on-one arbitration? Or should employees always be permitted to bring their claims in class or collective actions, no matter what they agreed with their employers?

As a matter of policy these questions are surely debatable. But as a matter of law the answer is clear. In the Federal Arbitration Act, Congress has instructed federal courts to enforce arbitration agreements according to their terms — including terms providing for individualized proceedings. Nor can we agree with the employees' suggestion that the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) offers a conflicting command. It is this Court's duty to interpret Congress's statutes as a harmonious whole rather than at war with one another. And abiding that duty here leads to an unmistakable conclusion. The NLRA secures to employees rights to organize unions and bargain collectively, but it says nothing about how judges and arbitrators must try legal disputes that leave the workplace and enter the courtroom or arbitral forum. This Court has never read a right to class actions into the NLRA — and for three quarters of a century neither did the National Labor Relations Board. Far from conflicting, the Arbitration Act and the NLRA have long enjoyed separate spheres of influence and neither permits this Court to declare the parties' agreements unlawful.

##### I

The three cases before us differ in detail but not in substance. Take _Ernst & Young LLP v. Morris._ There Ernst & Young and one of its junior accountants, Stephen Morris, entered into an agreement providing that they would arbitrate any disputes that might arise between them. The agreement stated that the employee could choose the arbitration provider and that the arbitrator could "grant any relief that could be granted by ... a court" in the relevant jurisdiction. The agreement also specified individualized arbitration, with claims "pertaining to different employees to be heard in separate proceedings."

After his employment ended, and despite having agreed to arbitrate claims against the firm, Mr. Morris sued Ernst & Young in federal court. He alleged that the firm had misclassified its junior accountants as professional employees and violated the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and California law by paying them salaries without overtime pay. Although the arbitration agreement provided for individualized proceedings, Mr. Morris sought to litigate the federal claim on behalf of a nationwide class under the FLSA's collective action provision, 29 U.S.C. § 216(b). He sought to pursue the state law claim as a class action under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23.

Ernst & Young replied with a motion to compel arbitration. The district court granted the request, but the Ninth Circuit reversed this judgment. The Ninth Circuit recognized that the Arbitration Act generally requires courts to enforce arbitration agreements as written. But the court reasoned that the statute's "saving clause" removes this obligation if an arbitration agreement violates some other federal law. And the court concluded that an agreement requiring individualized arbitration proceedings violates the NLRA by barring employees from engaging in the "concerted activity" of pursuing claims as a class or collective action.

Judge Ikuta dissented. In her view, the Arbitration Act protected the arbitration agreement from judicial interference and nothing in the Act's saving clause suggested otherwise. Neither, she concluded, did the NLRA demand a different result. Rather, that statute focuses on protecting unionization and collective bargaining in the workplace, not on guaranteeing class or collective action procedures in disputes before judges or arbitrators.

Although the Arbitration Act and the NLRA have long coexisted — they date from 1925 and 1935, respectively — the suggestion they might conflict is something quite new. Until a couple of years ago, courts more or less agreed that arbitration agreements like those before us must be enforced according to their terms. 

The National Labor Relations Board's general counsel expressed much the same view in 2010. Remarking that employees and employers "can benefit from the relative simplicity and informality of resolving claims before arbitrators," the general counsel opined that the validity of such agreements "does not involve consideration of the policies of the National Labor Relations Act." 

But recently things have shifted. In 2012, the Board — for the first time in the 77 years since the NLRA's adoption — asserted that the NLRA effectively nullifies the Arbitration Act in cases like ours. _D.R. Horton, Inc.,_ 357 N.L.R.B. 2277. Initially, this agency decision received a cool reception in court. In the last two years, though, some circuits have either agreed with the Board's conclusion or thought themselves obliged to defer to it under _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837 (1984). More recently still, the disagreement has grown as the Executive has disavowed the Board's (most recent) position, and the Solicitor General and the Board have offered us battling briefs about the law's meaning. We granted certiorari to clear the confusion.

##### II

We begin with the Arbitration Act and the question of its saving clause.

Congress adopted the Arbitration Act in 1925 in response to a perception that courts were unduly hostile to arbitration. No doubt there was much to that perception. Before 1925, English and American common law courts routinely refused to enforce agreements to arbitrate disputes. But in Congress's judgment arbitration had more to offer than courts recognized — not least the promise of quicker, more informal, and often cheaper resolutions for everyone involved. So Congress directed courts to abandon their hostility and instead treat arbitration agreements as "valid, irrevocable, and enforceable." 9 U.S.C. § 2. The Act, this Court has said, establishes "a liberal federal policy favoring arbitration agreements." 

Not only did Congress require courts to respect and enforce agreements to arbitrate; it also specifically directed them to respect and enforce the parties' chosen arbitration procedures. See § 3 (providing for a stay of litigation pending arbitration "in accordance with the terms of the agreement"); § 4 (providing for "an order directing that ... arbitration proceed in the manner provided for in such agreement"). Indeed, we have often observed that the Arbitration Act requires courts "rigorously" to "enforce arbitration agreements according to their terms, including terms that specify _with whom_ the parties choose to arbitrate their disputes and _the rules_ under which that arbitration will be conducted." 

On first blush, these emphatic directions would seem to resolve any argument under the Arbitration Act. The parties before us contracted for arbitration. They proceeded to specify the rules that would govern their arbitrations, indicating their intention to use individualized rather than class or collective action procedures. And this much the Arbitration Act seems to protect pretty absolutely. You might wonder if the balance Congress struck in 1925 between arbitration and litigation should be revisited in light of more contemporary developments. You might even ask if the Act was good policy when enacted. But all the same you might find it difficult to see how to avoid the statute's application.

Still, the employees suggest the Arbitration Act's saving clause creates an exception for cases like theirs. By its terms, the saving clause allows courts to refuse to enforce arbitration agreements "upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract." § 2. That provision applies here, the employees tell us, because the NLRA renders their particular class and collective action waivers illegal. In their view, illegality under the NLRA is a "ground" that "exists at law... for the revocation" of their arbitration agreements, at least to the extent those agreements prohibit class or collective action proceedings.

The problem with this line of argument is fundamental. Put to the side the question whether the saving clause was designed to save not only state law defenses but also defenses allegedly arising from federal statutes. See 834 F.3d, at 991-992, 997 (Ikuta, J., dissenting). Put to the side the question of what it takes to qualify as a ground for "revocation" of a contract. Put to the side for the moment, too, even the question whether the NLRA actually renders class and collective action waivers illegal. Assuming (but not granting) the employees could satisfactorily answer all those questions, the saving clause still can't save their cause.

It can't because the saving clause recognizes only defenses that apply to "any" contract. In this way the clause establishes a sort of "equal-treatment" rule for arbitration contracts. The clause "permits agreements to arbitrate to be invalidated by 'generally applicable contract defenses, such as fraud, duress, or unconscionability.'" At the same time, the clause offers no refuge for "defenses that apply only to arbitration or that derive their meaning from the fact that an agreement to arbitrate is at issue." Under our precedent, this means the saving clause does not save defenses that target arbitration either by name or by more subtle methods, such as by "interfering with fundamental attributes of arbitration." 

This is where the employees' argument stumbles. They don't suggest that their arbitration agreements were extracted, say, by an act of fraud or duress or in some other unconscionable way that would render _any_ contract unenforceable. Instead, they object to their agreements precisely because they require individualized arbitration proceedings instead of class or collective ones. And by attacking (only) the individualized nature of the arbitration proceedings, the employees' argument seeks to interfere with one of arbitration's fundamental attributes.

We know this much because of _Concepcion._ There this Court faced a state law defense that prohibited as unconscionable class action waivers in consumer contracts. The Court readily acknowledged that the defense formally applied in both the litigation and the arbitration context. But, the Court held, the defense failed to qualify for protection under the saving clause because it interfered with a fundamental attribute of arbitration all the same. It did so by effectively permitting any party in arbitration to demand classwide proceedings despite the traditionally individualized and informal nature of arbitration. This "fundamental" change to the traditional arbitration process, the Court said, would "sacrifice the principal advantage of arbitration — its informality — and make the process slower, more costly, and more likely to generate procedural morass than final judgment." Not least, _Concepcion_ noted, arbitrators would have to decide whether the named class representatives are sufficiently representative and typical of the class; what kind of notice, opportunity to be heard, and right to opt out absent class members should enjoy; and how discovery should be altered in light of the classwide nature of the proceedings. All of which would take much time and effort, and introduce new risks and costs for both sides. In the Court's judgment, the virtues Congress originally saw in arbitration, its speed and simplicity and inexpensiveness, would be shorn away and arbitration would wind up looking like the litigation it was meant to displace.

Of course, _Concepcion_ has its limits. The Court recognized that parties remain free to alter arbitration procedures to suit their tastes, and in recent years some parties have sometimes chosen to arbitrate on a classwide basis. But _Concepcion_'s essential insight remains: courts may not allow a contract defense to reshape traditional individualized arbitration by mandating classwide arbitration procedures without the parties' consent. Just as judicial antagonism toward arbitration before the Arbitration Act's enactment "manifested itself in a great variety of devices and formulas declaring arbitration against public policy," _Concepcion_ teaches that we must be alert to new devices and formulas that would achieve much the same result today. And a rule seeking to declare individualized arbitration proceedings off limits is, the Court held, just such a device.

The employees' efforts to distinguish _Concepcion_ fall short. They note that their putative NLRA defense would render an agreement "illegal" as a matter of federal statutory law rather than "unconscionable" as a matter of state common law. But we don't see how that distinction makes any difference in light of _Concepcion_'s rationale and rule. Illegality, like unconscionability, may be a traditional, generally applicable contract defense in many cases, including arbitration cases. But an argument that a contract is unenforceable _just because it requires bilateral arbitration_ is a different creature. A defense of that kind, _Concepcion_ tells us, is one that impermissibly disfavors arbitration whether it sounds in illegality or unconscionability. The law of precedent teaches that like cases should generally be treated alike, and appropriate respect for that principle means the Arbitration Act's saving clause can no more save the defense at issue in these cases than it did the defense at issue in _Concepcion._ At the end of our encounter with the Arbitration Act, then, it appears just as it did at the beginning: a congressional command requiring us to enforce, not override, the terms of the arbitration agreements before us.

##### III

But that's not the end of it. Even if the Arbitration Act normally requires us to enforce arbitration agreements like theirs, the employees reply that the NLRA overrides that guidance in these cases and commands us to hold their agreements unlawful yet.

This argument faces a stout uphill climb. When confronted with two Acts of Congress allegedly touching on the same topic, this Court is not at "liberty to pick and choose among congressional enactments" and must instead strive "'to give effect to both.'" A party seeking to suggest that two statutes cannot be harmonized, and that one displaces the other, bears the heavy burden of showing "'a clearly expressed congressional intention'" that such a result should follow. The intention must be "'clear and manifest.'" And in approaching a claimed conflict, we come armed with the "strong presumption" that repeals by implication are "disfavored" and that "Congress will specifically address" preexisting law when it wishes to suspend its normal operations in a later statute. .

These rules exist for good reasons. Respect for Congress as drafter counsels against too easily finding irreconcilable conflicts in its work. More than that, respect for the separation of powers counsels restraint. Allowing judges to pick and choose between statutes risks transforming them from expounders of what the law _is_ into policymakers choosing what the law _should be._ Our rules aiming for harmony over conflict in statutory interpretation grow from an appreciation that it's the job of Congress by legislation, not this Court by supposition, both to write the laws and to repeal them.

Seeking to demonstrate an irreconcilable statutory conflict even in light of these demanding standards, the employees point to Section 7 of the NLRA. That provision guarantees workers

> the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection.

From this language, the employees ask us to infer a clear and manifest congressional command to displace the Arbitration Act and outlaw agreements like theirs.

But that much inference is more than this Court may make. Section 7 focuses on the right to organize unions and bargain collectively. It may permit unions to bargain to prohibit arbitration. But it does not express approval or disapproval of arbitration. It does not mention class or collective action procedures. It does not even hint at a wish to displace the Arbitration Act — let alone accomplish that much clearly and manifestly, as our precedents demand.

Neither should any of this come as a surprise. The notion that Section 7 confers a right to class or collective actions seems pretty unlikely when you recall that procedures like that were hardly known when the NLRA was adopted in 1935. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23 didn't create the modern class action until 1966; class arbitration didn't emerge until later still; and even the Fair Labor Standards Act's collective action provision postdated Section 7 by years. And while some forms of group litigation existed even in 1935, Section 7's failure to mention them only reinforces that the statute doesn't speak to such procedures.

A close look at the employees' best evidence of a potential conflict turns out to reveal no conflict at all. The employees direct our attention to the term "other concerted activities for the purpose of ... other mutual aid or protection." This catchall term, they say, can be read to include class and collective legal actions. But the term appears at the end of a detailed list of activities speaking of "self-organization," "forming, joining, or assisting labor organizations," and "bargaining collectively." 29 U.S.C. § 157. And where, as here, a more general term follows more specific terms in a list, the general term is usually understood to "'embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects enumerated by the preceding specific words.'" All of which suggests that the term "other concerted activities" should, like the terms that precede it, serve to protect things employees "just do" for themselves in the course of exercising their right to free association in the workplace, rather than "the highly regulated, courtroom-bound 'activities' of class and joint litigation." None of the preceding and more specific terms speaks to the procedures judges or arbitrators must apply in disputes that leave the workplace and enter the courtroom or arbitral forum, and there is no textually sound reason to suppose the final catchall term should bear such a radically different object than all its predecessors.

The NLRA's broader structure underscores the point. After speaking of various "concerted activities" in Section 7, Congress proceeded to establish a regulatory regime applicable to each of them. The NLRA provides rules for the recognition of exclusive bargaining representatives, 29 U.S.C. § 159, explains employees' and employers' obligation to bargain collectively, § 158(d), and conscribes certain labor organization practices, §§ 158(a)(3), (b). The NLRA also touches on other concerted activities closely related to organization and collective bargaining, such as picketing, § 158(b)(7), and strikes, § 163. It even sets rules for adjudicatory proceedings under the NLRA itself. §§ 160, 161. Many of these provisions were part of the original NLRA in 1935, see 49 Stat. 449, while others were added later. But missing entirely from this careful regime is any hint about what rules should govern the adjudication of class or collective actions in court or arbitration. Without some comparably specific guidance, it's not at all obvious what procedures Section 7 might protect. Would opt-out class action procedures suffice? Or would opt-in procedures be necessary? What notice might be owed to absent class members? What standards would govern class certification? Should the same rules always apply or should they vary based on the nature of the suit? Nothing in the NLRA even whispers to us on any of these essential questions. And it is hard to fathom why Congress would take such care to regulate all the other matters mentioned in Section 7 yet remain mute about this matter alone — unless, of course, Section 7 doesn't speak to class and collective action procedures in the first place.

Telling, too, is the fact that when Congress wants to mandate particular dispute resolution procedures it knows exactly how to do so. Congress has spoken often and clearly to the procedures for resolving "actions," "claims," "charges," and "cases" in statute after statute. Congress has likewise shown that it knows how to override the Arbitration Act when it wishes — by explaining, for example, that, "not-withstanding any other provision of law,... arbitration may be used ... only if" certain conditions are met; or that "no predispute arbitration agreement shall be valid or enforceable" in other circumstances; or that requiring a party to arbitrate is "unlawful" in other circumstances yet. The fact that we have nothing like that here is further evidence that Section 7 does nothing to address the question of class and collective actions.

In response, the employees offer this slight reply. They suggest that the NLRA doesn't discuss any particular class and collective action procedures because it merely confers a right to use _existing_ procedures provided by statute or rule, "on the same terms as they are made available to everyone else." But of course the NLRA doesn't say even that much. And, besides, if the parties really take existing class and collective action rules as they find them, they surely take them subject to the limitations inherent in those rules — including the principle that parties may (as here) contract to depart from them in favor of individualized arbitration procedures of their own design.

Still another contextual clue yields the same message. The employees' underlying causes of action involve their wages and arise not under the NLRA but under an entirely different statute, the Fair Labor Standards Act. The FLSA allows employees to sue on behalf of "themselves and other employees similarly situated," 29 U.S.C. § 216(b), and it's precisely this sort of collective action the employees before us wish to pursue. Yet they do not offer the seemingly more natural suggestion that the FLSA overcomes the Arbitration Act to permit their class and collective actions. Why not? Presumably because this Court held decades ago that an identical collective action scheme (in fact, one borrowed from the FLSA) does _not_ displace the Arbitration Act or prohibit individualized arbitration proceedings. In fact, it turns out that "every circuit to consider the question" has held that the FLSA allows agreements for individualized arbitration. Faced with that obstacle, the employees are left to cast about elsewhere for help. And so they have cast in this direction, suggesting that one statute (the NLRA) steps in to dictate the procedures for claims under a different statute (the FLSA), and thereby overrides the commands of yet a third statute (the Arbitration Act). It's a sort of interpretive triple bank shot, and just stating the theory is enough to raise a judicial eyebrow.

Perhaps worse still, the employees' theory runs afoul of the usual rule that Congress "does not alter the fundamental details of a regulatory scheme in vague terms or ancillary provisions — it does not, one might say, hide elephants in mouseholes." Union organization and collective bargaining in the workplace are the bread and butter of the NLRA, while the particulars of dispute resolution procedures in Article III courts or arbitration proceedings are usually left to other statutes and rules — not least the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Arbitration Act, and the FLSA. It's more than a little doubtful that Congress would have tucked into the mousehole of Section 7's catchall term an elephant that tramples the work done by these other laws; flattens the parties' contracted-for dispute resolution procedures; and seats the Board as supreme superintendent of claims arising under a statute it doesn't even administer.

Nor does it help to fold yet another statute into the mix. At points, the employees suggest that the Norris-LaGuardia Act, a precursor of the NLRA, also renders their arbitration agreements unenforceable. But the Norris-LaGuardia Act adds nothing here. It declares "unenforceable" contracts that conflict with its policy of protecting workers' "concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection." 29 U.S.C. §§ 102, 103. That is the same policy the NLRA advances and, as we've seen, it does not conflict with Congress's statutory directions favoring arbitration. 

What all these textual and contextual clues indicate, our precedents confirm. In many cases over many years, this Court has heard and rejected efforts to conjure conflicts between the Arbitration Act and other federal statutes. In fact, this Court has rejected _every_ such effort to date (save one temporary exception since overruled), with statutes ranging from the Sherman and Clayton Acts to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, the Credit Repair Organizations Act, the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. Throughout, we have made clear that even a statute's express provision for collective legal actions does not necessarily mean that it precludes "'individual attempts at conciliation'" through arbitration. And we've stressed that the absence of any specific statutory discussion of arbitration or class actions is an important and telling clue that Congress has not displaced the Arbitration Act. Given so much precedent pointing so strongly in one direction, we do not see how we might faithfully turn the other way here.

Consider a few examples. In _Italian Colors,_ this Court refused to find a conflict between the Arbitration Act and the Sherman Act because the Sherman Act (just like the NLRA) made "no mention of class actions" and was adopted before Rule 23 introduced its exception to the "usual rule" of "individual" dispute resolution. In _Gilmer,_ this Court "had no qualms in enforcing a class waiver in an arbitration agreement even though" the Age Discrimination in Employment Act "expressly permitted collective legal actions." And in _CompuCredit,_ this Court refused to find a conflict even though the Credit Repair Organizations Act expressly provided a "right to sue," "repeatedly" used the words "action" and "court" and "class action," and even declared "any waiver" of the rights it provided to be "void." If all the statutes in all those cases did not provide a congressional command sufficient to displace the Arbitration Act, we cannot imagine how we might hold that the NLRA alone and for the first time does so today.

The employees rejoin that our precedential story is complicated by some of this Court's cases interpreting Section 7 itself. But, as it turns out, this Court's Section 7 cases have usually involved just what you would expect from the statute's plain language: efforts by employees related to organizing and collective bargaining in the workplace, not the treatment of class or collective actions in court or arbitration proceedings. Neither do the two cases the employees cite prove otherwise. In _Eastex, Inc. v. NLRB,_ 437 U.S. 556 (1978), we simply addressed the question whether a union's distribution of a newsletter in the workplace qualified as a protected concerted activity. We held it did, noting that it was "undisputed that the union undertook the distribution in order to boost its support and improve its bargaining position in upcoming contract negotiations," all part of the union's "'continuing organizational efforts.'" In _NLRB v. City Disposal Systems, Inc.,_ 465 U.S. 822 (1984), we held only that an employee's assertion of a right under a collective bargaining agreement was protected, reasoning that the collective bargaining "process — beginning with the organization of the union, continuing into the negotiation of a collective-bargaining agreement, and extending through the enforcement of the agreement — is a single, collective activity." Nothing in our cases indicates that the NLRA guarantees class and collective action procedures, let alone for claims arising under different statutes and despite the express (and entirely unmentioned) teachings of the Arbitration Act.

That leaves the employees to try to make something of our dicta. The employees point to a line in _Eastex_ observing that "it has been held" by other courts and the Board "that the 'mutual aid or protection' clause protects employees from retaliation by their employers when they seek to improve working conditions through resort to administrative and judicial forums." But even on its own terms, this dicta about the holdings of other bodies does not purport to discuss what _procedures_ an employee might be entitled to in litigation or arbitration. Instead this passage at most suggests only that "resort to administrative and judicial forums" isn't "entirely unprotected." Indeed, the Court proceeded to explain that it did not intend to "address ... the question of what may constitute 'concerted' activities in this litigation context." So even the employees' dicta, when viewed fairly and fully, doesn't suggest that individualized dispute resolution procedures might be insufficient and collective procedures might be mandatory. Neither should this come as a surprise given that not a single one of the lower court or Board decisions _Eastex_ discussed went so far as to hold that Section 7 guarantees a right to class or collective action procedures. As we've seen, the Board did not purport to discover that right until 2012, and no federal appellate court accepted it until 2016.

##### IV

The dissent sees things a little bit differently. In its view, today's decision ushers us back to the _Lochner_ era when this Court regularly overrode legislative policy judgments. The dissent even suggests we have resurrected the long-dead "yellow dog" contract. But like most apocalyptic warnings, this one proves a false alarm. 

Our decision does nothing to override Congress's policy judgments. As the dissent recognizes, the legislative policy embodied in the NLRA is aimed at "safeguarding, first and foremost, workers' rights to join unions and to engage in collective bargaining." Those rights stand every bit as strong today as they did yesterday. And rather than revive "yellow dog" contracts against union organizing that the NLRA outlawed back in 1935, today's decision merely declines to read into the NLRA a novel right to class action procedures that the Board's own general counsel disclaimed as recently as 2010.

Instead of overriding Congress's policy judgments, today's decision seeks to honor them. This much the dissent surely knows. Shortly after invoking the specter of _Lochner,_ it turns around and criticizes the Court for trying _too hard_ to abide the Arbitration Act's "'liberal federal policy favoring arbitration agreements,'" saying we "'ski'" too far down the "'slippery slope'" of this Court's arbitration precedent. But the dissent's real complaint lies with the mountain of precedent itself. The dissent spends page after page relitigating our Arbitration Act precedents, rehashing arguments this Court has heard and rejected many times in many cases that no party has asked us to revisit. 

When at last it reaches the question of applying our precedent, the dissent offers little, and understandably so. Our precedent clearly teaches that a contract defense "conditioning the enforceability of certain arbitration agreements on the availability of classwide arbitration procedures" is inconsistent with the Arbitration Act and its saving clause. And that, of course, is exactly what the employees' proffered defense seeks to do.

Nor is the dissent's reading of the NLRA any more available to us than its reading of the Arbitration Act. The dissent imposes a vast construction on Section 7's language. But a statute's meaning does not always "turn solely" on the broadest imaginable "definitions of its component words." Linguistic and statutory context also matter. We have offered an extensive explanation why those clues support our reading today. By contrast, the dissent rests its interpretation on legislative history. But legislative history is not the law. "It is the business of Congress to sum up its own debates in its legislation," and once it enacts a statute "'we do not inquire what the legislature meant; we ask only what the statute means.'" Besides, when it comes to the legislative history here, it seems Congress "did not discuss the right to file class or consolidated claims against employers." So the dissent seeks instead to divine messages from congressional commentary directed to different questions altogether — a project that threatens to "substitute the Court for the Congress." 

Nor do the problems end there. The dissent proceeds to argue that its expansive reading of the NLRA conflicts with and should prevail over the Arbitration Act. The NLRA leaves the Arbitration Act without force, the dissent says, because it provides the more "pinpointed" direction. Even taken on its own terms, though, this argument quickly faces trouble. The dissent says the NLRA is the more specific provision because it supposedly "speaks directly to group action by employees," while the Arbitration Act doesn't speak to such actions. But the question before us is whether courts must enforce particular arbitration agreements according to their terms. And it's the Arbitration Act that speaks directly to the enforceability of arbitration agreements, while the NLRA doesn't mention arbitration at all. So if forced to choose between the two, we might well say the Arbitration Act offers the more on-point instruction. Of course, there is no need to make that call because, as our precedents demand, we have sought and found a persuasive interpretation that gives effect to all of Congress's work, not just the parts we might prefer.

Ultimately, the dissent retreats to policy arguments. It argues that we should read a class and collective action right into the NLRA to promote the enforcement of wage and hour laws. But it's altogether unclear why the dissent expects to find such a right in the NLRA rather than in statutes like the FLSA that actually regulate wages and hours. Or why we should read the NLRA as mandating the availability of class or collective actions when the FLSA expressly authorizes them yet allows parties to contract for bilateral arbitration instead. While the dissent is no doubt right that class actions can enhance enforcement by "spreading the costs of litigation," it's also well known that they can unfairly "place pressure on the defendant to settle even unmeritorious claims". The respective merits of class actions and private arbitration as means of enforcing the law are questions constitutionally entrusted not to the courts to decide but to the policymakers in the political branches where those questions remain hotly contested. Just recently, for example, one federal agency banned individualized arbitration agreements it blamed for underenforcement of certain laws, only to see Congress respond by immediately repealing that rule. This Court is not free to substitute its preferred economic policies for those chosen by the people's representatives. _That,_ we had always understood, was _Lochner_'s sin.

##### *

The policy may be debatable but the law is clear: Congress has instructed that arbitration agreements like those before us must be enforced as written. While Congress is of course always free to amend this judgment, we see nothing suggesting it did so in the NLRA — much less that it manifested a clear intention to displace the Arbitration Act. Because we can easily read Congress's statutes to work in harmony, that is where our duty lies. 


##### Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.

The employees in these cases complain that their employers have underpaid them in violation of the wage and hours prescriptions of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA) and analogous state laws. Individually, their claims are small, scarcely of a size warranting the expense of seeking redress alone. But by joining together with others similarly circumstanced, employees can gain effective redress for wage underpayment commonly experienced. To block such concerted action, their employers required them to sign, as a condition of employment, arbitration agreements banning collective judicial and arbitral proceedings of any kind. The question presented: Does the Federal Arbitration Act permit employers to insist that their employees, whenever seeking redress for commonly experienced wage loss, go it alone, never mind the right secured to employees by the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) "to engage in ... concerted activities" for their "mutual aid or protection"? The answer should be a resounding "No."

In the NLRA and its forerunner, the Norris-LaGuardia Act (NLGA), Congress acted on an acute awareness: For workers striving to gain from their employers decent terms and conditions of employment, there is strength in numbers. A single employee, Congress understood, is disarmed in dealing with an employer. See _NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp.,_ 301 U.S. 1 (1937). The Court today subordinates employee protective labor legislation to the Arbitration Act. In so doing, the Court forgets the labor market imbalance that gave rise to the NLGA and the NLRA, and ignores the destructive consequences of diminishing the right of employees "to band together in confronting an employer." _NLRB v. City Disposal Systems, Inc.,_ 465 U.S. 822, 835 (1984). Congressional correction of the Court's elevation of the FAA over workers' rights to act in concert is urgently in order.

To explain why the Court's decision is egregiously wrong, I first refer to the extreme imbalance once prevalent in our Nation's workplaces, and Congress' aim in the NLGA and the NLRA to place employers and employees on a more equal footing. I then explain why the Arbitration Act, sensibly read, does not shrink the NLRA's protective sphere.

##### I

It was once the dominant view of this Court that "the right of a person to sell his labor upon such terms as he deems proper is ... the same as the right of the purchaser of labor to prescribe working conditions." _Adair v. United States,_ 208 U.S. 161 (1908) (invalidating federal law prohibiting interstate railroad employers from discharging or discriminating against employees based on their membership in labor organizations); accord _Coppage v. Kansas,_ 236 U.S. 1 (1915) (invalidating state law prohibiting employers from requiring employees, as a condition of employment, to refrain or withdraw from union membership).

The NLGA and the NLRA operate on a different premise, that employees must have the capacity to act collectively in order to match their employers' clout in setting terms and conditions of employment. For decades, the Court's decisions have reflected that understanding. See _Jones & Laughlin Steel,_ 301 U.S. 1 (upholding the NLRA against employer assault); cf. _United States v. Darby,_ 312 U.S. 100 (1941) (upholding the FLSA).

##### A

The end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th was a tumultuous era in the history of our Nation's labor relations. Under economic conditions then prevailing, workers often had to accept employment on whatever terms employers dictated. Aiming to secure better pay, shorter workdays, and safer workplaces, workers increasingly sought to band together to make their demands effective. 

Employers, in turn, engaged in a variety of tactics to hinder workers' efforts to act in concert for their mutual benefit. Notable among such devices was the "yellow-dog contract." Such agreements, which employers required employees to sign as a condition of employment, typically commanded employees to abstain from joining labor unions. Many of the employer-designed agreements cast an even wider net, "proscribing all manner of concerted activities." As a prominent United States Senator observed, contracts of the yellow-dog genre rendered the "laboring man ... absolutely helpless" by "waiving his right ... to free association" and by requiring that he "singly present any grievance he has."

Early legislative efforts to protect workers' rights to band together were unavailing. See, _e.g.,_ _Coppage,_ 236 U.S. at 26; Frankfurter & Greene, Legislation Affecting Labor Injunctions, 38 Yale L.J. 879, 889-890 (1929). Courts, including this one, invalidated the legislation based on then-ascendant notions about employers' and employees' constitutional right to "liberty of contract." While stating that legislatures could curtail contractual "liberty" in the interest of public health, safety, and the general welfare, courts placed outside those bounds legislative action to redress the bargaining power imbalance workers faced. 

In the 1930's, legislative efforts to safeguard vulnerable workers found more receptive audiences. As the Great Depression shifted political winds further in favor of worker-protective laws, Congress passed two statutes aimed at protecting employees' associational rights. First, in 1932, Congress passed the NLGA, which regulates the employer-employee relationship indirectly. Section 2 of the Act declares:

> Whereas ... the individual unorganized worker is commonly helpless to exercise actual liberty of contract and to protect his freedom of labor, ... it is necessary that he have full freedom of association, self-organization, and designation of representatives of his own choosing, ... and that he shall be free from the interference, restraint, or coercion of employers ... in the designation of such representatives or in self-organization or in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection.

Section 3 provides that federal courts shall not enforce "any ... undertaking or promise in conflict with the public policy declared in § 2." § 103. In adopting these provisions, Congress sought to render ineffective employer-imposed contracts proscribing employees' concerted activity of any and every kind. While banning court enforcement of contracts proscribing concerted action by employees, the NLGA did not directly prohibit coercive employer practices.

But Congress did so three years later, in 1935, when it enacted the NLRA. Relevant here, § 7 of the NLRA guarantees employees "the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, _and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection._" Section 8(a)(1) safeguards those rights by making it an "unfair labor practice" for an employer to "interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of the rights guaranteed in § 7." To oversee the Act's guarantees, the Act established the National Labor Relations Board (Board or NLRB), an independent regulatory agency empowered to administer "labor policy for the Nation." 

Unlike earlier legislative efforts, the NLGA and the NLRA had staying power. When a case challenging the NLRA's constitutionality made its way here, the Court, in retreat from its _Lochner_-era contractual-"liberty" decisions, upheld the Act as a permissible exercise of legislative authority. The Court recognized that employees have a "fundamental right" to join together to advance their common interests and that Congress, in lieu of "ignoring" that right, had elected to "safeguard" it.

##### B

Despite the NLRA's prohibitions, the employers in the cases now before the Court required their employees to sign contracts stipulating to submission of wage and hours claims to binding arbitration, and to do so only one-by-one.[^Epic2] When employees subsequently filed wage and hours claims in federal court and sought to invoke the collective-litigation procedures provided for in the FLSA and Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the employers moved to compel individual arbitration. The Arbitration Act, in their view, requires courts to enforce their take-it-or-leave-it arbitration agreements as written, including the collective-litigation abstinence demanded therein.

In resisting enforcement of the group-action foreclosures, the employees involved in this litigation do not urge that they must have access to a judicial forum. They argue only that the NLRA prohibits their employers from denying them the right to pursue work-related claims in concert in any forum. If they may be stopped by employer-dictated terms from pursuing collective procedures in court, they maintain, they must at least have access to similar procedures in an arbitral forum.

##### C

Although the NLRA safeguards, first and foremost, workers' rights to join unions and to engage in collective bargaining, the statute speaks more embracively. In addition to protecting employees' rights "to form, join, or assist labor organizations" and "to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing," the Act protects employees' rights "to engage in _other_ concerted activities for the purpose of ... mutual aid or protection." 

Suits to enforce workplace rights collectively fit comfortably under the umbrella "concerted activities for the purpose of ... mutual aid or protection." "Concerted" means "planned or accomplished together; combined." "Mutual" means "reciprocal." When employees meet the requirements for litigation of shared legal claims in joint, collective, and class proceedings, the litigation of their claims is undoubtedly "accomplished together." By joining hands in litigation, workers can spread the costs of litigation and reduce the risk of employer retaliation.

Recognizing employees' right to engage in collective employment litigation and shielding that right from employer blockage are firmly rooted in the NLRA's design. Congress expressed its intent, when it enacted the NLRA, to "protect the exercise by workers of full freedom of association," thereby remedying "the inequality of bargaining power" workers faced. There can be no serious doubt that collective litigation is one way workers may associate with one another to improve their lot.

Since the Act's earliest days, the Board and federal courts have understood § 7's "concerted activities" clause to protect myriad ways in which employees may join together to advance their shared interests. For example, the Board and federal courts have affirmed that the Act shields employees from employer interference when they participate in concerted appeals to the media, legislative bodies, and government agencies. "The 74th Congress," this Court has noted, "knew well enough that labor's cause often is advanced on fronts other than collective bargaining and grievance settlement within the immediate employment context."

Crucially important here, for over 75 years, the Board has held that the NLRA safeguards employees from employer interference when they pursue joint, collective, and class suits related to the terms and conditions of their employment. For decades, federal courts have endorsed the Board's view, comprehending that "the filing of a labor related civil action by a group of employees is ordinarily a concerted activity protected by § 7." The Court pays scant heed to this longstanding line of decisions.

##### D

In face of the NLRA's text, history, purposes, and longstanding construction, the Court nevertheless concludes that collective proceedings do not fall within the scope of § 7. None of the Court's reasons for diminishing § 7 should carry the day.

_1_

The Court relies principally on the _ejusdem generis_ canon. Observing that § 7's "other concerted activities" clause "appears at the end of a detailed list of activities," the Court says the clause should be read to "embrace" only activities "similar in nature" to those set forth first in the list, _i.e.,_ "'self-organization,' 'forming, joining, or assisting labor organizations,' and 'bargaining collectively,'" The Court concludes that § 7 should, therefore, be read to protect "things employees 'just do' for themselves." It is far from apparent why joining hands in litigation would not qualify as "things employees just do for themselves." In any event, there is no sound reason to employ the _ejusdem generis_ canon to narrow § 7's protections in the manner the Court suggests.

The _ejusdem generis_ canon may serve as a useful guide where it is doubtful Congress intended statutory words or phrases to have the broad scope their ordinary meaning conveys. Courts must take care, however, not to deploy the canon to undermine Congress' efforts to draft encompassing legislation. Nothing suggests that Congress envisioned a cramped construction of the NLRA. Quite the opposite, Congress expressed an embracive purpose in enacting the legislation, _i.e.,_ to "protect the exercise by workers of full freedom of association." 

_2_

In search of a statutory hook to support its application of the _ejusdem generis_ canon, the Court turns to the NLRA's "structure." Citing a handful of provisions that touch upon unionization, collective bargaining, picketing, and strikes, the Court asserts that the NLRA "establishes a regulatory regime" governing each of the activities protected by § 7. That regime, the Court says, offers "specific guidance" and "rules" regulating each protected activity. Observing that none of the NLRA's provisions explicitly regulates employees' resort to collective litigation, the Court insists that "it is hard to fathom why Congress would take such care to regulate all the other matters mentioned in § 7 yet remain mute about this matter alone — unless, of course, § 7 doesn't speak to class and collective action procedures in the first place." 

This argument is conspicuously flawed. When Congress enacted the NLRA in 1935, the only § 7 activity Congress addressed with any specificity was employees' selection of collective-bargaining representatives. The Act did not offer "specific guidance" about employees' rights to "form, join, or assist labor organizations." Nor did it set forth "specific guidance" for any activity falling within § 7's "other concerted activities" clause. The only provision that touched upon an activity falling within that clause stated: "Nothing in this Act shall be construed so as to interfere with or impede or diminish in any way the right to strike." That provision hardly offered "specific guidance" regarding employees' right to strike.

Without much in the original Act to support its "structure" argument, the Court cites several provisions that Congress added later, in response to particular concerns. It is difficult to comprehend why Congress' later inclusion of specific guidance regarding some of the activities protected by § 7 sheds any light on Congress' initial conception of § 7's scope.

But even if each of the provisions the Court cites had been included in the original Act, they still would provide little support for the Court's conclusion. For going on 80 years now, the Board and federal courts — including this one — have understood § 7 to protect numerous activities for which the Act provides no "specific" regulatory guidance. 

_3_

In a related argument, the Court maintains that the NLRA does not "even whisper" about the "rules that should govern the adjudication of class or collective actions in court or arbitration." The employees here involved, of course, do not look to the NLRA for the procedures enabling them to vindicate their employment rights in arbitral or judicial forums. They assert that the Act establishes their right to act in concert using existing, generally available procedures, and to do so free from employer interference. The FLSA and the Federal Rules on joinder and class actions provide the procedures pursuant to which the employees may ally to pursue shared legal claims. Their employers cannot lawfully cut off their access to those procedures, they urge, without according them access to similar procedures in arbitral forums. 

To the employees' argument, the Court replies: If the employees "really take existing class and collective action rules as they find them, they surely take them subject to the limitations inherent in those rules — including the principle that parties may (as here) contract to depart from them in favor of individualized arbitration procedures." The freedom to depart asserted by the Court, as already underscored, is entirely one sided. Once again, the Court ignores the reality that sparked the NLRA's passage: Forced to face their employers without company, employees ordinarily are no match for the enterprise that hires them. Employees gain strength, however, if they can deal with their employers in numbers. That is the very reason why the NLRA secures against employer interference employees' right to act in concert for their "mutual aid or protection." 

_4_

Further attempting to sow doubt about § 7's scope, the Court asserts that class and collective procedures were "hardly known when the NLRA was adopted in 1935." In particular, the Court notes, the FLSA's collective-litigation procedure postdated § 7 "by years" and Rule 23 "didn't create the modern class action until 1966."

First, one may ask, is there any reason to suppose that Congress intended to protect employees' right to act in concert using only those procedures and forums available in 1935? Congress framed § 7 in broad terms, "entrusting" the Board with "responsibility to adapt the Act to changing patterns of industrial life." With fidelity to Congress' aim, the Board and federal courts have recognized that the NLRA shields employees from employer interference when they, _e.g.,_ join together to file complaints with administrative agencies, even if those agencies did not exist in 1935.

Moreover, the Court paints an ahistorical picture. As Judge Wood, writing for the Seventh Circuit, cogently explained, the FLSA's collective-litigation procedure and the modern class action were "not written on a clean slate." By 1935, permissive joinder was scarcely uncommon in courts of equity. Nor were representative and class suits novelties. Indeed, their origins trace back to medieval times. And beyond question, "class suits long have been a part of American jurisprudence." Early instances of joint proceedings include cases in which employees allied to sue an employer. It takes no imagination, then, to comprehend that Congress, when it enacted the NLRA, likely meant to protect employees' joining together to engage in collective litigation.[^Epic7]

##### E

Because I would hold that employees' § 7 rights include the right to pursue collective litigation regarding their wages and hours, I would further hold that the employer-dictated collective-litigation stoppers, _i.e.,_ "waivers," are unlawful. As earlier recounted, § 8(a)(1) makes it an "unfair labor practice" for an employer to "interfere with, restrain, or coerce" employees in the exercise of their § 7 rights. Beyond genuine dispute, an employer "interferes with" and "restrains" employees in the exercise of their § 7 rights by mandating that they prospectively renounce those rights in individual employment agreements. The law could hardly be otherwise: Employees' rights to band together to meet their employers' superior strength would be worth precious little if employers could condition employment on workers signing away those rights. Properly assessed, then, the "waivers" rank as unfair labor practices outlawed by the NLRA, and therefore unenforceable in court.[^Epic9]

##### II

Today's decision rests largely on the Court's finding in the Arbitration Act "emphatic directions" to enforce arbitration agreements according to their terms, including collective-litigation prohibitions. Nothing in the FAA or this Court's case law, however, requires subordination of the NLRA's protections. Before addressing the interaction between the two laws, I briefly recall the FAA's history and the domain for which that Act was designed.

##### A

_1_

Prior to 1925, American courts routinely declined to order specific performance of arbitration agreements. Growing backlogs in the courts, which delayed the resolution of commercial disputes, prompted the business community to seek legislation enabling merchants to enter into binding arbitration agreements. The business community's aim was to secure to merchants an expeditious, economical means of resolving their disputes. The American Bar Association's Committee on Commerce, Trade and Commercial Law took up the reins in 1921, drafting the legislation Congress enacted, with relatively few changes, four years later.

The legislative hearings and debate leading up to the FAA's passage evidence Congress' aim to enable merchants of roughly equal bargaining power to enter into binding agreements to arbitrate _commercial_ disputes. 

The FAA's legislative history also shows that Congress did not intend the statute to apply to arbitration provisions in employment contracts. In brief, when the legislation was introduced, organized labor voiced concern. Herbert Hoover, then Secretary of Commerce, suggested that if there were "objections" to including "workers' contracts in the law's scheme," Congress could amend the legislation to say: "but nothing herein contained shall apply to contracts of employment of seamen, railroad employees, or any other class of workers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce." Congress adopted Secretary Hoover's suggestion virtually verbatim in § 1 of the Act, and labor expressed no further opposition.

Congress, it bears repetition, envisioned application of the Arbitration Act to voluntary, negotiated agreements. Congress never endorsed a policy favoring arbitration where one party sets the terms of an agreement while the other is left to "take it or leave it." 

_2_

In recent decades, this Court has veered away from Congress' intent simply to afford merchants a speedy and economical means of resolving commercial disputes. In 1983, the Court declared, for the first time in the FAA's then 58-year history, that the FAA evinces a "liberal federal policy favoring arbitration." Soon thereafter, the Court ruled, in a series of cases, that the FAA requires enforcement of agreements to arbitrate not only contract claims, but statutory claims as well. Further, in 1991, the Court concluded that the FAA requires enforcement of agreements to arbitrate claims arising under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, a workplace antidiscrimination statute. Then, in 2001, the Court ruled that the Arbitration Act's exemption for employment contracts should be construed narrowly, to exclude from the Act's scope only transportation workers' contracts.

Employers have availed themselves of the opportunity opened by court decisions expansively interpreting the Arbitration Act. Few employers imposed arbitration agreements on their employees in the early 1990's. After _Gilmer_ and _Circuit City,_ however, employers' exaction of arbitration clauses in employment contracts grew steadily. Moreover, in response to subsequent decisions addressing class arbitration, employers have increasingly included in their arbitration agreements express group-action waivers. It is, therefore, this Court's exorbitant application of the FAA — stretching it far beyond contractual disputes between merchants — that led the NLRB to confront, for the first time in 2012, the precise question whether employers can use arbitration agreements to insulate themselves from collective employment litigation. 

As I see it, in relatively recent years, the Court's Arbitration Act decisions have taken many wrong turns. Yet, even accepting the Court's decisions as they are, nothing compels the destructive result the Court reaches today.

##### B

Through the Arbitration Act, Congress sought "to make arbitration agreements as enforceable as other contracts, but not more so." Congress thus provided in § 2 of the FAA that the terms of a written arbitration agreement "shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, _save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract._" 9 U.S.C. § 2 (emphasis added). Pursuant to this "saving clause," arbitration agreements and terms may be invalidated based on "generally applicable contract defenses, such as fraud, duress, or unconscionability." 

Illegality is a traditional, generally applicable contract defense. "Authorities from the earliest time to the present unanimously hold that no court will lend its assistance in any way towards carrying out the terms of an illegal contract." I would hold that the arbitration agreements' employer-dictated collective-litigation waivers are unlawful. By declining to enforce those adhesive waivers, courts would place them on the same footing as any other contract provision incompatible with controlling federal law. The FAA's saving clause can thus achieve harmonization of the FAA and the NLRA without undermining federal labor policy.

The Court urges that our case law — most forcibly, _AT & T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion,_ — rules out reconciliation of the NLRA and the FAA through the latter's saving clause. I disagree. True, the Court's Arbitration Act decisions establish that the saving clause "offers no refuge" for defenses that discriminate against arbitration, "either by name or by more subtle methods." The Court, therefore, has rejected saving clause salvage where state courts have invoked generally applicable contract defenses to discriminate "covertly" against arbitration. In _Concepcion,_ the Court held that the saving clause did not spare the California Supreme Court's invocation of unconscionability doctrine to establish a rule blocking enforcement of class-action waivers in adhesive consumer contracts. Class proceedings, the Court said, would "sacrifice the principal advantage of arbitration — its informality — and make the process slower, more costly, and more likely to generate procedural morass than final judgment." Accordingly, the Court concluded, the California Supreme Court's rule, though derived from unconscionability doctrine, impermissibly disfavored arbitration, and therefore could not stand.

Here, however, the Court is not asked to apply a generally applicable contract defense to generate a rule discriminating against arbitration. At issue is application of the ordinarily superseding rule that "illegal promises will not be enforced," to invalidate arbitration provisions at odds with the NLRA, a pathmarking federal statute. That statute neither discriminates against arbitration on its face, nor by covert operation. It requires invalidation of _all_ employer-imposed contractual provisions prospectively waiving employees' § 7 rights. 

##### C

Even assuming that the FAA and the NLRA were inharmonious, the NLRA should control. Enacted later in time, the NLRA should qualify as "an implied repeal" of the FAA, to the extent of any genuine conflict. Moreover, the NLRA should prevail as the more pinpointed, subject-matter specific legislation, given that it speaks directly to group action by employees to improve the terms and conditions of their employment. 

Citing statutory examples, the Court asserts that when Congress wants to override the FAA, it does so expressly. The statutes the Court cites, however, are of recent vintage. Each was enacted during the time this Court's decisions increasingly alerted Congress that it would be wise to leave not the slightest room for doubt if it wants to secure access to a judicial forum or to provide a green light for group litigation before an arbitrator or court. The Congress that drafted the NLRA in 1935 was scarcely on similar alert.

##### III

The inevitable result of today's decision will be the underenforcement of federal and state statutes designed to advance the well-being of vulnerable workers. 

The probable impact on wage and hours claims of the kind asserted in the cases now before the Court is all too evident. Violations of minimum-wage and overtime laws are widespread. One study estimated that in Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York City alone, low-wage workers lose nearly $3 billion in legally owed wages each year. The U.S. Department of Labor, state labor departments, and state attorneys general can uncover and obtain recoveries for some violations. Because of their limited resources, however, government agencies must rely on private parties to take a lead role in enforcing wage and hours laws. 

If employers can stave off collective employment litigation aimed at obtaining redress for wage and hours infractions, the enforcement gap is almost certain to widen. Expenses entailed in mounting individual claims will often far outweigh potential recoveries. 

Fear of retaliation may also deter potential claimants from seeking redress alone. Further inhibiting single-file claims is the slim relief obtainable, even of the injunctive kind. The upshot: Employers, aware that employees will be disinclined to pursue small-value claims when confined to proceeding one-by-one, will no doubt perceive that the cost-benefit balance of underpaying workers tips heavily in favor of skirting legal obligations.

In stark contrast to today's decision, the Court has repeatedly recognized the centrality of group action to the effective enforcement of antidiscrimination statutes. With Court approbation, concerted legal actions have played a critical role in enforcing prohibitions against workplace discrimination based on race, sex, and other protected characteristics. In this context, the Court has comprehended that government entities charged with enforcing antidiscrimination statutes are unlikely to be funded at levels that could even begin to compensate for a significant dropoff in private enforcement efforts. That reality, as just noted, holds true for enforcement of wage and hours laws.

I do not read the Court's opinion to place in jeopardy discrimination complaints asserting disparate-impact and pattern-or-practice claims that call for proof on a group-wide basis, which some courts have concluded cannot be maintained by solo complainants. It would be grossly exorbitant to read the FAA to devastate Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and other laws enacted to eliminate, root and branch, class-based employment discrimination. With fidelity to the Legislature's will, the Court could hardly hold otherwise.

I note, finally, that individual arbitration of employee complaints can give rise to anomalous results. Arbitration agreements often include provisions requiring that outcomes be kept confidential or barring arbitrators from giving prior proceedings precedential effect. As a result, arbitrators may render conflicting awards in cases involving similarly situated employees — even employees working for the same employer. Arbitrators may resolve differently such questions as whether certain jobs are exempt from overtime laws. With confidentiality and no-precedential-value provisions operative, irreconcilable answers would remain unchecked.

##### * * *

If these untoward consequences stemmed from legislative choices, I would be obliged to accede to them. But the edict that employees with wage and hours claims may seek relief only one-by-one does not come from Congress. It is the result of take-it-or-leave-it labor contracts harking back to the type called "yellow dog," and of the readiness of this Court to enforce those unbargained-for agreements. The FAA demands no such suppression of the right of workers to take concerted action for their "mutual aid or protection." 

[^Epic2]: (n.2 in dissenting opinion) The Court's opinion opens with the question: "Should employees and employers be allowed to agree that any disputes between them will be resolved through one-on-one arbitration?" Were the "agreements" genuinely bilateral? Petitioner Epic Systems Corporation e-mailed its employees an arbitration agreement requiring resolution of wage and hours claims by individual arbitration. The agreement provided that if the employees "continued to work at Epic," they would "be deemed to have accepted the Agreement." Ernst & Young similarly e-mailed its employees an arbitration agreement, which stated that the employees' continued employment would indicate their assent to the agreement's terms. Epic's and Ernst & Young's employees thus faced a Hobson's choice: accept arbitration on their employer's terms or give up their jobs.

[^Epic7]: (n.7 in dissenting opinion) The Court additionally suggests that something must be amiss because the employees turn to the NLRA, rather than the FLSA, to resist enforcement of the collective-litigation waivers. But the employees' reliance on the NLRA is hardly a reason to "raise a judicial eyebrow." The NLRA's guiding purpose is to protect employees' rights to work together when addressing shared workplace grievances of whatever kind.

[^Epic9]: (n.9 in dissenting opinion) I would similarly hold that the Norris-LaGUardia Act renders the collective-litigation waivers unenforceable. That Act declares it the public policy of the United States that workers "shall be free from the interference, restraint, or coercion of employers" when they engage in "concerted activities" for their "mutual aid or protection." 29 U.S.C. § 102. Section 3 provides that federal courts shall not enforce any "promise in conflict with the Act's policy." § 103. Because employer-extracted collective-litigation waivers interfere with employees' ability to engage in "concerted activities" for their "mutual aid or protection," the arm-twisted waivers collide with the Norris-LaGUardia Act's stated policy; thus, no federal court should enforce them. 

---

##### Note on _Epic Systems _

The Supreme Court's decisions in _Epic Systems_ and other cases upholding mandatory arbitration provisions in employment and consumer contracts have prompted efforts to amend the FAA. One such measure, the "Ending Forced Arbitration of Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment Act," took effect in 2022: 

<div class="legal-code">

> **9 U.S.C. § 401 - Definitions**

> In this chapter:

> (1\) Predispute arbitration agreement.—

> The term "predispute arbitration agreement" means any agreement to arbitrate a dispute that had not yet arisen at the time of the making of the agreement.

> (2\) Predispute joint-action waiver.—

> The term "predispute joint-action waiver" means an agreement, whether or not part of a predispute arbitration agreement, that would prohibit, or waive the right of, one of the parties to the agreement to participate in a joint, class, or collective action in a judicial, arbitral, administrative, or other forum, concerning a dispute that has not yet arisen at the time of the making of the agreement.

> (3\) Sexual assault dispute.—

> The term "sexual assault dispute" means a dispute involving a nonconsensual sexual act or sexual contact, as such terms are defined in section 2246 of title 18 or similar applicable Tribal or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.

> (4\) Sexual harassment dispute.—

> The term "sexual harassment dispute" means a dispute relating to conduct that is alleged to constitute sexual harassment under applicable Federal, Tribal, or State law.

> **9 U.S.C. § 402 - No validity or enforceability**

> (a\) In General.—

> Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, at the election of the person alleging conduct constituting a sexual harassment dispute or sexual assault dispute, or the named representative of a class or in a collective action alleging such conduct, no predispute arbitration agreement or predispute joint-action waiver shall be valid or enforceable with respect to a case which is filed under Federal, Tribal, or State law and relates to the sexual assault dispute or the sexual harassment dispute.

> (b\) Determination of Applicability.—

> An issue as to whether this chapter applies with respect to a dispute shall be determined under Federal law. The applicability of this chapter to an agreement to arbitrate and the validity and enforceability of an agreement to which this chapter applies shall be determined by a court, rather than an arbitrator, irrespective of whether the party resisting arbitration challenges the arbitration agreement specifically or in conjunction with other terms of the contract containing such agreement, and irrespective of whether the agreement purports to delegate such determinations to an arbitrator.

</div>

A pending bill, the [Forced Arbitration Injustice Repeal (FAIR) Act](https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/963/text), would go further, invalidating all "predispute arbitration agreements that force arbitration of future employment, consumer, antitrust, or civil rights disputes".  

--- 


#### Abernathy v. DoorDash, Inc., 438 F.Supp.3d 1062 (N.D. Cal. 2020)

##### WILLIAM ALSUP, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

##### Introduction

In this labor classification action, petitioners seek to compel arbitration. Respondent moves to stay the proceedings pending preliminary and final approval of a class settlement in a state action. For the reasons stated below, petitioners' motion to compel is GRANTED IN PART and is otherwise DENIED. Respondent's motion to stay is DENIED.

##### Statement

Petitioners are 5,879 couriers who work for respondent, DoorDash, Inc. In order to make deliveries for respondent, petitioners allegedly each clicked through a contract that contained a "Mutual Arbitration Provision," that required among other things, that each petitioner and respondent "mutually agree to this Mutual Arbitration Provision, which is governed by the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. §§ 1-16) ("FAA") and shall apply to any and all disputes arising out of or relating to this Agreement, including CONTRACTOR's classification as an independent contractor" and required the arbitrations to be administered by the American Arbitration Association (AAA). The agreement also provided that the parties "mutually agree that by entering into this agreement to arbitrate, both waive their right to have any dispute or claim brought, heard or arbitrated as, or to participate in, a class action, collective action and/or representative action...." In turn, AAA's Commercial Arbitration Rules require each individual to pay a filing fee of $300 and the responding company to pay a filing fee of $1,900.

Petitioner couriers say they have been improperly classified as independent contractors rather than employees. Accordingly, in August 2019, petitioners' counsel filed individual demands for arbitration with the AAA on behalf of 2,250 individuals (_Abernathy_ petitioners) claiming violations of statutes such as the Fair Labor Standards Act and the California Labor Code. In September 2019, petitioners' counsel filed further demands on behalf of 4,000 more individuals with the AAA (_Boyd_ petitioners) making the same claims. Petitioner couriers paid over $1.2 million in filing fees. AAA then imposed a deadline of October 28 for respondent DoorDash to pay its share of the fees for the _Abernathy_ arbitrations and a deadline of November 7 for the _Boyd_ arbitrations. On October 28, respondent's counsel emailed AAA and petitioners' counsel stating they had "determined that there are significant deficiencies with the claimants' filings," and that "Doordash is under no obligation to, and will not at this time, tender to AAA the nearly $12 million in administrative fees." On November 8, AAA emailed the parties and stated, "Respondent has failed to submit the previous requested fees for the 6,250 individual matters; accordingly, we have administratively closed our files".

On November 15, petitioner couriers commenced this action to compel arbitration for the _Abernathy_ petitioners and moved for a temporary restraining order a few days later. On November 19, additional petitioners (through the same counsel) sought to compel arbitration in the Superior Court of California for the _Boyd_ petitioners. Respondent then removed the _Boyd_ action here. All cases wound up before the undersigned judge.

A hearing ensued on the motion for temporary restraining order as to the _Abernathy_ petitioners on November 25. DoorDash had begun to require couriers, in order to sign in for new work, to click through a new agreement that required arbitration with the International Institute for Conflict Prevention & Resolution (CPR), instead of AAA. At the hearing, however, respondent DoorDash represented that couriers could opt out of the new arbitration agreement, and instead continue to arbitrate under AAA if they so desired, so petitioners withdrew their motion for temporary restraining order.

Meanwhile, in 2018, some couriers had filed a class action (through different counsel) in the Superior Court of California, County of San Francisco, alleging respondent had willfully misclassified its couriers. _Marciano v. DoorDash, Inc.,_ A class settlement was recently pending preliminary approval there. Some of the unnamed class members in the class action are petitioners in the instant actions. Although the underlying legal issues are dissimilar to those for the motion to compel here, any petitioner who accepts the _Marciano_ settlement will release the claims that would be arbitrated here. Petitioners' counsel here filed a brief there on behalf of proposed intervenors to object to the _Marciano_ settlement. On January 30, 2020, the _Marciano_ court vacated the hearing on the motion for preliminary approval of the settlement and designated the action as a complex case.

Herein, petitioner couriers have now filed an amended motion to compel arbitration with the AAA which seeks to compel arbitration on behalf of 5,879 individuals. Respondent separately moves to stay the motion to compel pending the preliminary and final approval of the settlement agreement in _Marciano._ This order follows full briefing and oral argument.

##### Analysis

##### 1. Motion to Compel Arbitration.

Under the Federal Arbitration Act, a district court determines "whether a valid arbitration agreement exists and, if so, whether the agreement encompasses the dispute at issue." If the court is satisfied "that the making of the agreement for arbitration or the failure to comply therewith is not in issue, the court shall make an order directing the parties to proceed to arbitration in accordance with the terms of the agreement." 9 U.S.C. § 4.

Here, petitioners contend (and respondent does not dispute) that at least 5,010 petitioners have signed declarations attesting to "clicking through" DoorDash's AAA arbitration agreement. As stated above, the agreement provides that the parties "mutually agree to this Mutual Arbitration Provision, which is governed by the Federal Arbitration Act (9 U.S.C. §§ 1-16) ("FAA") and shall apply to any and all disputes arising out of or relating to this Agreement, including CONTRACTOR's classification as an independent contractor...." Significantly, the agreements for these 5,010 petitioners are valid, cover the claims in suit, and require arbitration before the AAA.

There are 869 petitioners that DoorDash argues do not have a valid agreement with DoorDash. Instead of submitting declarations for these petitioners, petitioners' counsel submitted mere "witness statements" in which they stated, among other things, their residential address, the amount of time they have worked for DoorDash, and that they did not recall opting out of arbitration. The November order, however, specifically asked petitioners to provide a declaration setting forth "the identifying information he or she used to register with DoorDash" and "at least referencing in an ascertainable way the specific arbitration he or she clicked through." The submitted witness statements do not provide such information and without them, this order cannot conclude that an arbitration agreement exists as to those petitioners.

DoorDash has also raised questions as to the authority of petitioners' counsel to represent certain other petitioners and seek relief on their behalf. While the factual requisites have been satisfied to compel arbitration as to 5,010 petitioners, these specific procedural disputes are referred to the AAA for decision. If it turns out that Keller Lenkner has overstated its authority, or for any procedural reason, petitioners have not perfected their right to arbitrate, this order imposes on Keller Lenkner a requirement to fully reimburse DoorDash for all arbitration fees and attorney's fees and expenses incurred by DoorDash in defending the arbitration, and the arbitrator shall so award them.

The motion to compel arbitration is GRANTED as to the 5,010 petitioners who submitted declarations. DoorDash is ordered to immediately commence AAA arbitration with these petitioners. The motion is DENIED as to the 869 petitioners who submitted mere witness statements.

Petitioner couriers have further requested that respondent pay all attorney's fees and costs related to the arbitration under California Senate Bill 707, which took effect on January 1, 2020. In relevant part, the law states: [^Abernathy1]

> In an employment or consumer arbitration that requires, either expressly or through application of state or federal law or the rules of the arbitration administrator, the drafting party to pay certain fees and costs before the arbitration can proceed, if the fees or costs to initiate an arbitration proceeding are not paid within 30 days after the due date, the drafting party is in material breach of the arbitration agreement, is in default of the arbitration, and waives its right to compel arbitration under Section 1281.2.

It further states that if the above occurs, the employee may: "(1) Withdraw the claim from arbitration and proceed in a court of appropriate jurisdiction (2) Compel arbitration in which the drafting party shall pay reasonable attorney's fees and costs related to the arbitration". The law also states "the court shall impose a monetary sanction against a drafting party that materially breaches an arbitration agreement pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 1281.97 or subdivision (a) of Section 1281.98, by ordering the drafting party to pay the reasonable expenses, including attorney's fees and costs, incurred by the employee or consumer as a result of the material breach." 

"A retrospective operation will not be given to a statute which interferes with antecedent rights ... unless such be 'the unequivocal and inflexible import of the terms, and the manifest intention of the legislature.'" Senate Bill 707 does not apply retroactively and here, the events at issue all occurred prior to the enactment of the bill. Petitioners began to file their individual demands for arbitration in August 2019. Following respondent's failure to pay the necessary fees, AAA closed all of the petitioners' files in November 2019. The underlying demands for arbitration and corresponding fee payment requirements are thus not currently pending before AAA. Petitioners' request for relief under California Senate Bill 707 is accordingly DENIED.

##### 2. Motion to Stay.

Respondent DoorDash seeks to stay the instant proceedings until final approval of the _Marciano_ settlement given, among other things, the potential overlap between the petitioners here and the class members in _Marciano._ Ironically, DoorDash originally sought to dismiss _Marciano_ on the ground that the couriers had a duty to arbitrate. Petitioners' counsel then sought to do exactly that. Their clients want individual arbitrations before AAA and this Court accordingly expects all petitioner couriers here to opt out of the class action in _Marciano_ — if it ever gets preliminary and final approval. If it turns out that any petitioners attempt to double dip (get both class action relief and individual arbitration), then this order recommends the arbitrator impose on Keller Lenkner an order to fully reimburse DoorDash for all arbitration fees and attorney's fees and expenses incurred by DoorDash in defending the matter twice. As to DoorDash's concern regarding _CenturyLink_ and the possibility that petitioners here may prefer the _Marciano_ settlement, this order reminds Keller Lenkner that it would be a serious problem to assert that the firm has attorney-client privilege with a DoorDash courier who has not authorized Keller Lenkner to represent him or her, or to initiate arbitration on behalf of a petitioner without his or her informed consent. That said, the motion to stay is DENIED.

This order notes a concern that the proposed _Marciano_ settlement seeks to prevent opt outs via petitioners' counsel and instead requires an original ink signature by each individual. This provision is an obvious attempt to make it as hard as possible for petitioners to opt out, thus binding them to the _Marciano_ settlement. Perhaps the judge overseeing the proposed settlement will give this provision extra scrutiny.

##### 3. Motion to Seal.

Petitioners have filed an unopposed motion to file under seal certain portions of their reply brief, Aaron Zigler's declaration, and the exhibits attached to Aaron Zigler's declaration. CPR has designated these materials as confidential purporting that they contain, among other things, trade secrets, proprietary information, and sensitive information. The materials sought to be sealed here all relate to email communications between CPR and respondent's counsel, Gibson Dunn, in 2019. In short, the emails track the following events: in May 2019, Gibson Dunn reached out to CPR to discuss issues DoorDash was having with filing fees for mass arbitrations, and to find a solution to prevent "an abuse of process." In October 2019, CPR provided Gibson Dunn with a draft of a mass arbitration protocol for discussion. A week later, CPR provided Gibson Dunn with another draft of the protocol based on their discussion. Gibson Dunn "interlineated comments, questions, and recommendations" in the new draft. CPR and Gibson Dunn traded additional drafts and revisions in the following weeks. On November 4, CPR notified Gibson Dunn that it had posted the finalized new protocol and asked to be notified when the new DoorDash contracts providing for arbitration under CPR were distributed. Just because such information has been designated as confidential does not mean that it deserves to be kept from the public once filed in the federal district court. The district court should not be a party to concealing this information from the public, especially as it concerns an arbitration organization that holds itself out to the public as impartial. These documents would be useful to the public in evaluating the true extent to which the organization is impartial. The motion to seal is accordingly DENIED.

##### Conclusion

For decades, the employer-side bar and their employer clients have forced arbitration clauses upon workers, thus taking away their right to go to court, and forced class-action waivers upon them too, thus taking away their ability to join collectively to vindicate common rights. The employer-side bar has succeeded in the United States Supreme Court to sustain such provisions. The irony, in this case, is that the workers wish to enforce the very provisions forced on them by seeking, even if by the thousands, individual arbitrations, the remnant of procedural rights left to them. The employer here, DoorDash, faced with having to actually honor its side of the bargain, now blanches at the cost of the filing fees it agreed to pay in the arbitration clause. No doubt, DoorDash never expected that so many would actually seek arbitration. Instead, in irony upon irony, DoorDash now wishes to resort to a classwide lawsuit, the very device it denied to the workers, to avoid its duty to arbitrate. This hypocrisy will not be blessed, at least by this order.

[^Abernathy1]:
  {-} The court in _Abernathy_ did not address whether Cal. S.B. 707 is preempted by the FAA. Thus far, one federal court has held that S.B. is preempted, "because it makes arbitration provisions unenforceable on arbitration-specific grounds.". _Belyea v. GreenSky, Inc._, No. 20-cv-01693-JSC, 2022 WL 14965532 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 26, 2022). Other federal courts, as well as California state courts, have disagreed. _See, e.g._,  _Agerkop v. Sisyphian, LLC_, No. CV 19-10414-CBM, 2021 WL 1940456 (C.D. Cal. April 13, 2021) (holding SB 707 not preempted, because provisions "are consistent with the purpose of the FAA for efficient and expeditious resolution of claims by dis-incentivizing employers from delaying adjudication in arbitration by refusing to pay required arbitration fees"); _Postmates v. 10,356 Individuals_, No. CV 20-2783 PSG, 2021 WL 540155 (C.D. Cal. Jan. 19, 2021) (holding SB 707 "not preempted by the FAA because it does not invalidate arbitration agreements" and "removes obstacles to the arbitration process"); _accord_, _Costa v. Melikov_, No. CV 2:20-09467-AB-ASx, 2022 WL 18228248 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 21, 2022); _Espinoza v. Superior Ct. of Los Angeles Cnty._, 83 Cal. App. 5th 761 (2022); _Gallo v. Wood Ranch USA, Inc._, 81 Cal. App. 5th 621 (2022). 

#### U.S. Chamber blames judges, arbitrators and lawyers for mass arbitration 'abuses'

##### Alison Frankel, Reuters (March 2, 2023)

In more than a decade of litigation to entrench corporations' power to impose arbitration on consumers and employees, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has steadfastly championed arbitration as a fair and efficient alternative to class actions.

But when thousands of workers and consumers actually file demands against a company to have their nearly identical claims arbitrated?

That's not fair or efficient. It's "blackmail," the Chamber's Institute for Legal Reform said in an extremely provocative [new report](https://instituteforlegalreform.com/research/mass-arbitration-shakedown-coercing-unjustified-settlements/).

The 80-page paper, entitled "Mass Arbitration Shakedown: Coercing Unjustified Settlements," argued that mass arbitration, in which plaintiffs' lawyers file hundreds or even thousands of nearly identical demands against a defendant, is the "21st century equivalent of the abusive class actions that characterized the last part of the 20th century."

The business model, according to the report, has nothing to do with the validity of claimants' demands. Instead, the Chamber asserted, plaintiffs' firms rely on the leverage of hefty arbitration fees – which can quickly escalate to tens of millions of dollars when thousands of people file demands — to force corporations into settlements that are "wholly unrelated to the claims' merits."

The report, written by Mayer Brown lawyers Andrew Pincus, Archis Parasharami, Kevin Ranlett and Carmen Longoria-Green, asserted that plaintiffs' firms may be skirting an array of ethical rules in their mass arbitration campaigns. Among other potential pitfalls, the Chamber cited conflicts of interest among clients who diverge on accepting settlement offers; restrictions on client solicitation; and prohibitions on representing out-of-state clients.

The report calls on state bar associations to investigate the business model of mass arbitration firms, rather than allowing "serious questions about whether the rules of professional responsibility are being honored" to "fester."

I've got a response below from leading mass arbitration firm Keller Postman, but I'll point out here that professor Maria Glover of Georgetown University Law Center, who authored a [definitive 2022 study](https://www.stanfordlawreview.org/print/article/mass-arbitration/) of mass arbitration, said she is not aware of any case in which a court or arbitrator has concluded that a plaintiffs' firm committed systemic ethical breaches by conducting a mass arbitration campaign. Glover said she found the Chamber's "serious and sweeping" ethics claims to be "somewhat unsupported."

The report liberally spreads blame for the purported scourge of mass arbitration. Federal judges, the report said, have so far refused to recognize or confront abuses by plaintiffs' lawyers engaged in these campaigns. (To the contrary: As I've reported, judges have instead noted the "hypocrisy" of corporations attempting to evade mass arbitration after imposing arbitration on workers and consumers.)

And arbitration providers JAMS and the American Arbitration Association, the Chamber said, have failed to quell mass arbitration through changes in their procedural rules

JAMS president Kimberly Taylor said in an email statement as a neutral administrator, JAMS is prohibited from changing the terms of arbitration agreements without express consent from both sides. JAMS encourages both sides in mass arbitrations to collaborate on procedural strategies but is otherwise bound by pre-existing contract terms. "JAMS will not reduce fees for either side to avoid even an appearance of impartiality or bias," she said. An AAA spokesperson did not respond to my query.

The real victims of these mass arbitration abuses, according to the Chamber report, are consumers and employees. If companies follow the lead of Amazon.com Inc and abandon mandatory arbitration because of the threat of mass claims, the report said, consumers and workers will no longer be able to benefit from the efficiencies of arbitration to resolve small disputes.

"This is a growing problem," said Matt Webb of the Chamber's Institute for Legal Reform. "It's unfortunate. If you have a fair system, we think arbitration works very well for both sides."

The report urged arbitration providers and federal courts to endorse a bellwether, or "batch arbitration" process that would allow companies to test the merits of claimants' demands before they are required to fork over millions of dollars in fees.

A batch system, Webb said, would restore fairness by refocusing cases on actual claims. "At the end of the day," Webb said, "it's in the interests of arbitration providers to resolve this."

The report specifically named two plaintiffs' firms engaged in mass arbitration. One is Labaton Sucharow, which is embroiled in a dispute in Chicago federal court with Samsung Electronics America Inc over Labaton's filing of more than 50,000 demands to arbitrate consumers' biometric privacy claims. The Chamber criticized Labaton's use of social media and other advertising to "recruit" mass arbitration clients. The report also cited Labaton's alleged failure to vet clients.

Labaton general counsel Michael Canty did not respond to my query on the Chamber report. The firm said in a January 2023 brief in the Chicago litigation that it followed all AAA rules, including the payment of $2.5 million in fees to launch its clients' cases.

The other firm named in the report is Keller Postman. Name partner Warren Postman – who worked for the U.S Chamber before joining the mass arbitration firm – called the Chamber's position "cynical and hypocritical" in an email statement.

When the Chamber wanted the U.S. Supreme Court to bless class action waivers, Postman said, it assured the justices in an amicus brief that forced arbitration would not restrict access to justice because plaintiffs' firms could use technology to pursue thousands of claims.

But now that Keller Postman is doing just that, Postman said, "The Chamber has made its real position clear: Plaintiffs should not just be barred from bringing their claims in a class; they should be barred from bringing their claims in any substantial number at all."

Mayer Brown's Pincus said there's no discrepancy between the Chamber's argument in the old amicus brief and in the new report. "No one is saying lawyers can't represent multiple claimants," he said. "We are saying that claims should be processed in a way that produces fair, merits-based results, not coerced settlements."

Georgetown professor Glover was less passionate than Postman, but also noted the irony of the Chamber's advocacy for "batch" handling of mass arbitration demands.

"They got here by eschewing a device that achieved efficiencies," Glover said, referring to class actions. "Now they're saying the solution is to return to something that mimics the device they rejected."