#### Johnson v. NCAA, 108 F.4th 163 (3d Cir. 2024)

<p class="case-h1">RESTREPO, Circuit Judge.</p>

Do efforts that provide tangible benefits to identifiable institutions deserve compensation? In most instances, they do. And yet athletes at our most competitive colleges and universities are told that their "amateur" status renders them ineligible for payment. The issue raised by this interlocutory appeal is not whether the athletes before us are actually owed the protections of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), but rather, whether college athletes, by nature of their so-called amateur status, are precluded from ever bringing an FLSA claim. Our answer to this question is no.

This case originated in 2019 when athletes at several National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I (D-I) member schools filed a complaint asserting violations of the FLSA and various state wage laws. The plaintiffs argued that they were entitled to federal minimum wage compensation for the time they spent representing their schools. The NCAA and member schools moved to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(6), asserting that the athletes— as "amateurs"—are not, and historically have never been, considered employees of their respective schools or the NCAA. The District Court determined that the athletes had sufficiently pleaded facts that, under a multifactor balancing test, might allow them to be classified as employees under the FLSA and denied the motion to dismiss. The NCAA and member schools appealed.

For the reasons stated below, we will affirm in part the District Court's decision denying Appellants' motion to dismiss. But because the District Court erred by applying the test from _Glatt v. Fox Searchlight Pictures, Inc.,_ 811 F.3d 528 (2d Cir. 2016), to determine whether college athletes can be employees under the FLSA, we will vacate and remand for application of an economic realities analysis grounded in common-law agency principles.

<p class="case-h1">I. BACKGROUND</p>

Appellees contend that they are entitled to minimum wage under the FLSA for time spent on their sport-related activities. Appellants are thirteen colleges and universities that are members of the NCAA. The NCAA regulates intercollegiate sports and has jurisdiction over approximately 1,100 schools and some 500,000 athletes. The NCAA has multi-year, multi-billion-dollar contracts with ESPN, CBS, and Turner Sports to broadcast athletic competitions between D-I schools, and it distributes shares of those broadcasting fees to its member institutions. In addition to shares of broadcasting fees, D-I. schools receive fees from multi-year, multi-million-dollar agreements with television and radio networks that they have entered, either individually or as part of an NCAA conference, to broadcast their athletic competitions. To understand how collegiate sport generates these revenues, a brief historical survey is instructive.

<p class="case-h2">A. College Athletics in Historical Context</p>

American intercollegiate athletics began when a group of Yale students formed a boat club in 1843; undergraduates at Harvard followed suit the next year. In 1852, the two clubs staged our nation's first intercollegiate athletic competition (The Race) on a lake in New Hampshire. From that first contest, the spectacle of college sports has grown steadily to become a multi-billion-dollar industry.

Put simply, athletic victories have provided many colleges with the institutional visibility needed to facilitate tremendous growth. Indeed, although tension continues to exist between the demands of traditional education and athletics, even early college presidents came to see athletes as effective avatars for their institutions. By 1875, intercollegiate regattas had become feature items in nationally distributed magazines and front-page material for leading newspapers. Both "students and the public began to regard victory as a measure of an institution's prestige." One student of the era explained that the contests were "sacredly connected with the glory of Alma Mater herself."

Such glory was especially valuable to lesser-known institutions. Take the 1871 regatta between Harvard, Brown, and the "Farmer Boys" of the Massachusetts Agricultural College of Amherst for example. An unexpected victory over widely-favored Harvard made the little-known, eight-year-old land grant college now known as UMass Amherst a nationally recognized institution overnight. More importantly, it inspired hope among other lesser-known colleges that they too might do the same.

This phenomenon would later become known as the "Flutie Effect" following a 1984 football game between Boston College and the University of Miami. With six seconds on the clock and Miami up by four, Boston College's quarterback, Doug Flutie, completed an astounding forty-eight-yard Hail Mary touchdown pass to win the game. Over the next two years, applications to Boston College jumped thirty percent. Successful football and basketball programs have more recently driven notoriety and applications to, among other institutions, Georgetown, Northwestern, Boise State, Texas Christian University, Butler, Gonzaga, Virginia Commonwealth University, Texas A&M, Florida Gulf Coast, Lehigh, and Wichita State.

Indeed, Professor Doug J. Chung describes athletic programs as higher education's primary form of mass media advertising. In one study, Professor Chung found that raising a football team from mediocrity to national status caused, on average, a 17.7 percent increase in the number of applications to the team's institution. Increased applications then contribute to a positive feedback loop producing more revenue, greater selectivity in admissions, improved alumni engagement, greater fundraising, and better faculty recruiting, all of which can catapult regional universities into national prominence in a way that would otherwise be impossible.

Profit, after all, has always played a role in college athletics. The Race—the very first intercollegiate competition—was neither proposed nor organized by the students of Yale or Harvard, but by James Elkins, the superintendent of the Boston, Concord, and Montreal Railroad. Mr. Elkins had hoped that staging a regatta on Lake Winnipesaukee would increase ridership on his rail line, raise the value of his nearby real estate holdings, and bring tourists to the quiet, lakeside resort. Unsurprisingly, the teams were treated to a lavish vacation, and the winners received "a handsome pair of black, silver-tipped, walnut oars." Such commercialization was the norm in early athletic competitions.

The same is true today. First and foremost, the colleges themselves stand to profit substantially from television contracts, licensing fees, and ticket, concessions, and merchandise sales that their athletic programs generate. Some estimate that college athletes generate roughly $3 billion in annual revenue for their schools, conferences, and the NCAA. And at least 38 NCAA member colleges currently gross more than $100 million annually in sports revenue. The athletic department of the University of Texas, for example, reported $271 million in revenue for 2023, more than the highest-earning National Hockey League team. In 2020, 63 other NCAA member colleges earned more than $25 million from their football programs.

The colleges are not alone in profiting. One study reported that 45 million Americans planned to wager a combined $3.1 billion on the 2022 NCAA March Madness basketball tournament. And the NCAA itself, first founded to help regulate dangerous playing conditions, has grown into a financial behemoth with revenues often exceeding $1 billion annually. ESPN, for example, recently announced that it will pay the NCAA $115 million each year for exclusive broadcast rights to 40 leagues' championship games. March Madness and the College Football Playoff each have their own television deals valued at $8.8 billion and $5.64 billion, respectively.

By far the most obvious beneficiaries of college sports are a select few administrators, athletic directors, and coaches. The recently retired Alabama football coach, Nick Saban, earned over $11.4 million in his last year leading the Crimson Tide, making him the highest-paid coach in college sports and the eighth-highest-paid football coach in America. In fact, seven-teen of the 37 highest-paid coaches in _any_ sport in the United States make their living in college football or basketball. By contrast, university professors and administrators make far less. The University of Virginia, for example, pays $900,000 each year to its president and $600,000 to its law school dean while its basketball coach receives $5.2 million. This is not abnormal; in forty states, the highest-paid public employee is a D-I coach. Ohio State president E. Gordon Gee summarized this upside-down world when, asked whether he would consider firing his embattled football coach, he quipped, "I'm just hoping the coach doesn't dismiss me."

<p class="case-h2">B. Amateurism and the "Student-Athlete" in College Athletics</p>

We have opted against using a term both parties employ liberally in briefing: "student-athlete." Like "band-aid" or "laundromat," "student-athlete" is essentially a brand name that has become synonymous with its product. As scholars have noted, the term is an NCAA marketing invention designed to "conjure the nobility of amateurism," assert "the precedence of scholarship over athletics," and "obfuscate the nature of the legal relationship at the heart of a growing commercial enterprise." Context makes this vividly apparent.

The NCAA arose from the public outcry over the dangers of early college football. In 1904 alone, at least twenty players died, not on battlefields, but on football fields. The next year, urged on by President Theodore Roosevelt, a group of colleges chartered the non-profit organization that would become the NCAA to establish common safety guidelines in college athletics. In doing so, the NCAA also promoted an ethos of strict amateurism that forbade all forms of payment, including athletic scholarships. Yet for the first fifty years of its existence, this ethos was openly defied: most member schools admitted to offering under-the-table compensation to star players. By the 1950s, even the ban on athletic scholarships—a central tenant of the original, British-inspired amateur ideal— lacked so much as a pretense of enforcement. In reality, such payments were already quite commonplace. Conceding defeat to this fact, the NCAA elected in 1956 to bring some forms of compensation (including athletic scholarships) aboveground in the hope that it could better regulate the market. But the NCAA also foresaw the explosion of college athletics and hoped to both facilitate and capitalize on that growth. Athletics scholarships proved to be an ideal mechanism for promoting order and retaining economic control.

In response, courts began to question the economic realities of college athletics. Two state appellate court cases in particular took direct aim at the professed amateur status of athletes at D-I schools. Those courts saw that college sports had become a big business, and that athletes thus operated in the dual capacity of both student and employee. These cases stoked fears in NCAA leaders that college athletes might someday receive statutory employment protections. The NCAA's answer was the term "student-athlete," which it imposed as the exclusive label for its players. As the historian Taylor Branch notes:

> The term student-athlete was deliberately ambiguous. College players were not students at play (which might understate their athletic obligations), nor were they just athletes in college (which might imply they were professionals). That they were high-performance athletes meant they could be forgiven for not meeting the academic standards of their peers; that they were students meant they did not have to be compensated, ever, for anything more than the cost of their studies. _Student-athlete_ became the NCAA's signature term, repeated constantly in and out of courtrooms.

The NCAA's strategy has worked for some time, supported in part through dicta from the Supreme Court's decision in _NCAA v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma,_ stating that "the NCAA plays a critical role in the maintenance of a revered tradition of amateurism in college sports." With _Board of Regents_ in hand, the NCAA and its member colleges have largely succeeded in persuading courts to grant the concept of amateurism the force of law. As one federal district judge wrote, "even in the increasingly commercial modern world, there is still validity to the Athenian concept of a complete education derived from fostering full growth of both mind and body." The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit similarly found the idea that college athletes are "selling their services" and that universities are "purchasers of labor" to be a "surprisingly cynical view of college athletics." College football players, the Court reasoned, are not market participants because they are "student-athletes."

Until recently, NCAA rules barred athlete compensation beyond "tuition and fees, room and board, books and other expenses related to attendance." But the Supreme Court's unanimous decision in _NCAA v. Alston_ disrupted the status quo by holding that that _Board of Regents_ did not create a binding precedent "reflexively" supporting the organization's compensation rules. The NCAA responded by changing its rules to allow athletes to profit from their name, image, and likeness (NIL) with direct endorsement deals. Historically, the NCAA and the colleges had been the only entities permitted to do so.

Justice Kavanaugh, in an oft-cited concurrence, noted that the NCAA's remaining rules restricting non-education-related compensation raised serious antitrust questions as well. Rebuking the NCAA's argument that maintaining compensation restrictions is necessary to distinguish college athletics from professional athletics, Justice Kavanaugh wrote that "businesses like the NCAA cannot avoid the consequences of price-fixing labor by incorporating price-fixed labor into the definition of its product." Although Justice Kavanaugh did suggest that the NCAA could protect itself from future judicial scrutiny by permitting collective bargaining, he also flatly concluded that "nowhere else in America can businesses get away with agreeing not to pay their workers a fair market rate on the theory that their product is defined by not paying their workers a fair market rate.... The NCAA is not above the law."

 Appellants raise similarly circular arguments. But as the Supreme Court recently suggested, such rationales no longer hold the weight they once did. The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), likely in response to _Alston,_ is for the first time taking the position that college athletes are employees for purposes of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). In the midst of these changes, our Court is the first to consider whether college athletes may also be employees under the ambit of the related FLSA.

<p class="case-h2">C. The Athletes at Bar</p>

The plaintiffs allege that although the NCAA and its member schools profit from their efforts, the NCAA's bylaws prohibit member schools from offering wages and forbid students from accepting them. To enforce these rules, the bylaws prescribe sanctions for violating schools and students, including suspension or termination of athletes, suspension of coaching staff, and disqualification of teams from competitions. The NCAA and defendant schools argue that, although athletes do not earn wages, the benefits of participation include payment in other forms, such as increased discipline, a stronger work ethic, improved strategic thinking, time management, leadership, and goal setting skills, and a greater ability to work collaboratively.

The athletes allege that the soft skills the Appellants point to are inadequate compensation for their services and that they were subject to extensive training and performance requirements that regularly interfered with their learning. As just one example, the plaintiffs allege that they were forced to schedule classes around their athletic commitments, limiting their range of learning options. During the football season at Villanova University, for example, Mr. Johnson was allegedly required to spend weekdays from 5:45 AM to 11:30 AM practicing or engaging in other activities related to athletics. This commitment locked him out of hundreds of available classes, including prerequisites for certain academic degrees. In addition to Mr. Johnson's personal experiences, the athletes cite to studies showing that NCAA requirements frequently prevent athletes from pursuing their preferred majors.

In their First Amended Complaint, the athletes asserted claims under the FLSA for the NCAA's and member colleges' failure to pay them a minimum wage and sought relief in the form of unpaid wages, an equal amount in liquidated damages, and attorneys' fees. Some athletes also asserted state-specific failure-to-pay claims. Finally, the athletes asserted unjust enrichment claims. The defendant schools moved to dismiss the First Amended Complaint pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), arguing that athletes cannot be employees as a matter of law and therefore had failed to state a claim.

On August 25, 2021, the District Court rejected this argument. In the absence of controlling authority providing a specific multifactor test to evaluate whether athletes can be considered "employees" under the FLSA, the District Court applied the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit's multifactor test from _Glatt,_ where the Court considered whether unpaid interns must be deemed employees under the FLSA and therefore compensated for their work. The District Court determined that _Glatt_ required it to assess the "economic reality" of the relationship by identifying whether the athletes or the NCAA and schools were the primary beneficiary of the relationship. After balancing and considering the seven _Glatt_ factors, the District Court concluded that the athletes had plausibly pleaded that they may be employees and denied the motion to dismiss. Subsequently, the District Court granted the Appellants' motion to certify an interlocutory appeal from the denial of their motion to dismiss. The question certified for appeal was: "Whether NCAA Division I athletes can be employees of the colleges and universities they attend for purposes of the Fair Labor Standards Act solely by virtue of their participation in interscholastic athletics."

<p class="case-h1">II. DISCUSSION</p>

The FLSA protects "the rights of those who toil, of those who sacrifice a full measure of their freedom and talents to the use and profit of others." Accordingly, it gives specific, non-waivable minimum protections to individuals to ensure that each covered employee receives "a fair day's pay for a fair day's work," and is protected from "the evil of 'overwork' as well as 'underpay,

Consistent with the FLSA's "remedial and humanitarian" purpose, Congress adopted definitions of "employee" and "employer" that brought a broad swath of workers under the statute's coverage, including even "those who would decline its protections." Accordingly, "the term 'employee' means any individual employed by an employer," a definition that has been described as "the broadest... that has ever been included in any one act." Similarly open-ended, an "employer" is "any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee," and to "employ" is "to suffer or permit to work." These "statutory definitions regarding employment status are necessarily broad to effectuate the remedial purposes of the Act."

The "striking breadth" of these definitions brings within the FLSA's ambit workers "who might not qualify as employees under a strict application of traditional agency law principles" or under other federal statutes, and these definitions have long been held to apply notwithstanding any "prior custom or contract... not to compensate employees for certain portions of their work." Accordingly, to determine employment under the Act, the Supreme Court has instructed that we "look to the economic realities of the relationship." 

Under this framework, the employer-employee "relationship does not depend on ... isolated factors but rather upon the circumstances of the whole activity." Limitations articulated by the Supreme Court include that independent contractors are not employees under the FLSA, and "an individual who, 'without promise or expectation of compensation, but solely for his personal purpose or pleasure, worked in activities carried on by other persons either for their pleasure or profit,' is outside the sweep of the Act," 

Importantly, in determining that the _Alamo_ "volunteers" were actually employees because they expected "in-kind" compensation for services performed, the Court distinguished their situation from that of a group of trainees in _Walling_. In _Walling,_ the trainees participated in a week-long course, during which they performed some work under close supervision without receiving or expecting remuneration beyond the possibility of future employment. But the Court held that the trainees did not qualify as "employees" under the FLSA, as their work did not confer an "immediate advantage" to the purported employer. Instead, as the Court in _Alamo_ explained, the trainees in _Walling_ were akin to "students in a school," whose activities are driven by the educational benefits. By contrast, the _Alamo_ "volunteers" engaged in work over extended periods, sometimes years, and received "in-kind benefits" like food, clothing, shelter, and other benefits as compensation. These benefits were "wages in another form." Even though the _Alamo_ "volunteers" claimed they expected no compensation, the Court explained that a compensation agreement can be either "express" or "implied," and "if an exception to the Act were carved out for employees willing to testify that they performed work "voluntarily," employers might be able to use superior bargaining power to coerce employees to make such assertions, or to waive their protections under the Act."

Since _McComb,_ we and other courts of appeal have adopted multifactor tests to analyze, based on the circumstances of the whole relationship between the parties, whether individuals are employees or independent contractors, whether entities are joint employers, and whether individuals are employees or interns. Here, we confront circumstances unlike those previously addressed, but core principles that traditionally define an employee-employer relationship are no less applicable.

<p class="case-h2">A. Determining the Employment Status of College Athletes</p>

In looking to "the economic realities of the relationship" between college athletes and their schools or the NCAA, we begin by noting that athletes in the collegiate context are _sui generis._ After all, merely playing sports, even at the college level, cannot always be considered commercial _work_ integral to the employer's business in the same way that the activities performed by independent contractors or interns are assumed to be in previously mentioned multifactor tests. The Supreme Court has acknowledged this possibility, explaining that the FLSA does not cover a person who, "without promise or expectation of compensation, but solely for his personal purpose or pleasure" performs "activities carried on by other persons either for their pleasure or profit." The Department of Labor (DOL) makes the same distinction. But just as intuitively, with professional athletes as the clearest indicators, playing sports can certainly constitute compensable work. Any test to determine college athlete employee status under the FLSA must therefore be able to identify athletes whose play is _also_ work.

For its part, the FLSA does not define "work." The Supreme Court "broadly" interprets it in the FLSA context and initially defined it as "physical or mental exertion (whether burdensome or not) controlled or required by the employer and pursued necessarily and primarily for the employer's benefit." The Court has since clarified that "exertion" is "not in fact necessary for an activity to constitute 'work'" because "an employer ... may hire someone to do nothing." Accordingly, for an activity to constitute "work" it need only be controlled by an employer and pursued necessarily and primarily for that employer's benefit. A putative employee, meanwhile, is expected to receive either express or implied "in-kind" compensation for services rendered.

Read together, these cases largely mirror common-law agency principles others have used to help decide cases involving similar purported employer-employee relationships. Chief among them is the NLRB's decision in _Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York,_ (2016), where the Board applied a common-law agency test (also known as the "right-of-control" test) to answer the threshold question of whether graduate students who perform services at a university in connection with their studies are statutory employees within the meaning of Section 2(3) of the NLRA. That test asks whether the individual, in return for payment, performs services under the control of another person, or under a person with the right to control such services. By reverting to common-law agency principles, the Board notably rejected a _Glatt_-like primary beneficiary analysis. Instead, the Board held that student teaching and research assistants are employees under the NLRA if they meet the Act's broad definition of "employee," which encompasses individuals who meet the common law test for employment. 

We recognize that the NLRA and FLSA have distinct policy goals, but their shared history often inspires courts to draw interchangeably from each statute's caselaw to answer fundamental questions related to the equitable regulation of the American workplace. 

Significantly, the NLRA and FLSA both use broad definitions of "employee" and "employer" to delineate statutory coverage. The "striking breadth" of the FLSA's definitions, after all, brings within the Act's purview workers "who might not qualify as employees under a strict application of traditional agency law principles." It necessarily follows that determining an employer-employee relationship under the FLSA _includes,_ but is not limited to, a strict application of traditional agency law principles. The NLRA, meanwhile, does not explicitly define the terms. But it is well established that "when Congress uses the term 'employee' in a statute that does not define the term, courts interpreting the statute 'must infer, unless the statute otherwise dictates, that Congress means to incorporate the established meaning'" of the term, with reference to "common-law agency doctrine." Put otherwise, common-law agency doctrine, a doctrine largely symmetrical to governing FLSA caselaw, is also a helpful analytical tool in evaluating college athletes' purported employer-employee relationships in either the NLRA or the FLSA context.

We do not reproach the District Court for being drawn to _Glatt._ But while we agree with our sister circuit that "an employment relationship is not created when the tangible and intangible benefits provided to a worker are greater than a worker's contribution to the employer's operation," _Glatt_'s overall utility with respect to college athletes is undercut by its accurate presumption that unpaid interns all perform work for their employers.

Indeed, the facts that animate _Glatt_ are not sufficiently analogous to the case at bar because the work performed during properly designed unpaid internships "can greatly benefit interns," as "the intern enters into the relationship with the expectation of receiving educational or vocational benefits that are not necessarily expected with all forms of employment." Meanwhile, the educational and vocational benefits of college athletics cited by Appellants as alternative forms of remuneration (increased discipline, a stronger work ethic, improved strategic thinking, time management, leadership, and goal setting skills, and a greater ability to work collaboratively) are all exactly the kinds of skills one would typically acquire in a work environment. Additionally, the _Glatt_ test has limited relevance to athletes because it compares the benefits that an intern might receive at an internship with the training received at the intern's formal education program. In comparison, interscholastic athletics are not part of any academic curriculum. Here, the plaintiffs go as far as alleging that the sports played are actually _detrimental_ to their academic performance because athletic performance provides no academic benefits, they are frequently precluded from enrolling in hundreds of courses that conflict with their athletic obligations, and they are unable to declare their preferred majors.

We therefore hold that college athletes may be employees under the FLSA when they (a) perform services for another party, (b) "necessarily and primarily for the other party's benefit," and (d) in return for "express" or "implied" compensation or "in-kind benefits," If so, the athlete in question may plainly fall within the meaning of "employee" as defined in 29 U.S.C. § 203(e)(1). Ultimately, the touchstone remains whether the cumulative circumstances of the relationship between the athlete and college or NCAA reveal an economic reality that is that of an employee-employer.

<p class="case-h2">B. The "Frayed Tradition" of Amateurism is No Shield to FLSA Claims</p>

Appellants argue that the history and tradition of amateurism is sufficient not only to remove college athletes from the general population of people whose FLSA employment status is routinely determined through the application of multifactor tests, but also compels dismissal of this suit. We disagree. Although the Supreme Court remarked in _Board of Regents_ dicta that "the NCAA plays a critical role in the maintenance of a revered tradition of amateurism in college sports," it has since unanimously clarified that _Board of Regents_ did not expressly approve of _every_ NCAA limit on athlete compensation or foreclose "any meaningful review of those limits today." The NCAA's athlete compensation rules, after all, were not even at issue in _Board of Regents._ That case instead concerned the NCAA's attempt to exercise monopoly control over television broadcast agreements.

Responding to an argument like the one that the Appellants make here, the Supreme Court in _Alston_ noted that the NCAA had "not adopted any consistent definition" of amateurism and acknowledged that the organization's "rules and restrictions on compensation have shifted markedly over time," which further undermined the NCAA's reliance on the concept. The Court's disapproval of amateurism as a legal defense was only strengthened by a point made by Justice Kavanaugh in concurrence that we now adopt: the argument "that colleges may decline to pay student athletes because the defining feature of college sports ... is that the student athletes are not paid," is circular, unpersuasive, and increasingly untrue. 

Nevertheless, this is the argument Appellants most heavily rely upon to characterize the economic realities of the college athlete's alleged employment relationship. They argue that the District Court should have adopted the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit's reasoning in _Berger,_ where the Court declined to apply the _Glatt_ test to determine whether a group of track and field athletes from the University of Pennsylvania were employees under the FLSA. In the eyes of both the _Berger_ Court and the Appellants, no multifactor test is appropriate. Rather, a general economic realities analysis that centers on amateurism and college athletes' historical lack of bargaining power should be used. In other words, Appellants ask us to elevate amateurism to a quasi-legal status in a way the Supreme Court has already rebuffed.

The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals did indeed decline to apply a multifactor test because doing so "'failed to capture the true nature of the relationship' between the athletes and their schools and was not a 'helpful guide.'" Instead, it concluded that the "longstanding tradition of amateurism defines the economic reality of the relationship between athletes and their schools," and held that existing multifactor tests could not adequately account for this tradition. A "more flexible standard" was needed. Ultimately, the Court held that college athletes were not employees entitled to minimum wage under the FLSA because their "amateur" status made it such that their "'play' is not 'work.'" 

To reach its conclusion, the _Berger_ Court relied on its own precedent in _Vanskike,_ which considered whether incarcerated people had any rights under the FLSA. In _Vanskike,_ the Court similarly declined to use a multifactor test because any test would fail to account for what it called a "free labor situation" in the prison context. This "situation" exists in prisons because the Thirteenth Amendment permits involuntary servitude, meaning that the work incarcerated people perform is not based on voluntary employment relationships. The _Vanskike_ Court also pointed out that some factors typically found in FLSA multifactor tests could not logically be applied in the prison context. For example, one common factor among FLSA tests is a consideration of the amount of control the employer has over the worker. Given that prisons have almost complete control over prisoners' lives, the _Vanskike_ Court reasoned that such control was incidental to the workers' custodial status. 

We disagree with our sister circuit court's comparison of college athletes to prisoners and refuse to equate a prisoner's involuntary servitude, as authorized by the Thirteenth Amendment, to "the longstanding tradition" of amateurism in college athletics. Nor are we the only ones. _See, e.g.,_ _Dawson v. NCAA,_ 932 F.3d 905, 908 n.2 (9th Cir. 2019)_ ("We do not adopt _Berger_'s analytical premises nor its rationales."). But, in a limited sense, we agree that existing multifactor tests are inadequate when applied to the college athlete. As noted above, we believe that such tests either improperly assume that the alleged employee engages in compensable work or account for factors not relevant to college athletics.

In sum, for the purposes of the FLSA, we will not use a "frayed tradition" of amateurism with such dubious history to define the economic reality of athletes' relationships to their schools. Instead, we believe that the amateurism that Judge Hamilton calls into question in his "note of caution" highlights the need for an economic realities framework that distinguishes college athletes who "play" their sports for predominantly recreational or noncommercial reasons from those whose play crosses the legal line into work protected by the FLSA. Accordingly, we also hold that college athletes cannot be barred as a matter of law from asserting FLSA claims simply by virtue of a "revered tradition of amateurism" in D-I athletics.

<p class="case-h1">III. CONCLUSION</p>

In light of the foregoing, we will vacate the District Court's order, remand for further proceedings in compliance with this opinion, and direct the District Court to grant leave to amend.

<p class="case-h1">PORTER, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment.</p>

I write separately to explain why I concur only in the judgment.

<p class="case-h1">III. Traditional multifactor tests and the amateurism principle are unhelpful guides.</p>

I agree with the majority's rejection of the tests in cases distinguishing employee workers from independent-contractor workers or interns. In those cases, the analysis began with the undisputed premise that individuals performed "work" that was necessary and integral to their employer's business. Here, the critical antecedent question is whether student-athletes are "workers" providing "services" to an employer.

I do not question the existence or virtue of amateurism in college athletics. But a combination of market forces, decades-spanning behavior of the NCAA and some Division I teams and athletes, and the Supreme Court's relevant antitrust decisions have enervated that concept, at least for some student-athletes. Whatever legal force amateurism once had in the Division I context, it is now insufficient to decide cases like this one. Instead, we must look to the language and rules provided by statute and Supreme Court decisions.

<p class="case-h1">IV. Play is not work.</p>

The FLSA applies only to "employees" who perform "work" for an "employer." So an obvious starting point is to ask whether a student-athlete may play her chosen sport because she wants to play, not to work primarily for her university's benefit. Play is arguably a basic human good that many pursue for its own sake. It is not work, even though it may involve sustained, regulated, physical, or intellectual exertion and combine with other goals such as competition, teamwork, fitness, or personal glory.

If a student-athlete participating in an NCAA-sponsored sport—fencing, water polo, rifle, track and field, golf, beach volleyball, or skiing, for example—is engaged in _play_ rather than _work,_ then none of the commonly used tests will be useful because the FLSA simply does not apply.

The FLSA does not define "work." The Supreme Court interprets it as denoting "physical or mental exertion (whether burdensome or not) controlled or required by the employer and performed necessarily and primarily for the benefit of the employer and his business." But the dictionary from which the Supreme Court derived that definition specifically distinguishes work "from something undertaken primarily for _pleasure, sport_, or immediate gratification, or as merely incidental to other activities." So even the Court's broad definition of work does not encompass play or sport.

Division I student-athletes perform at the top of their highly competitive sports, and some are world-class. They certainly exert themselves physically and mentally. In colloquial terms, they "work out," just as lesser athletes and fitness buffs do. But not all exertion is "work" for purposes of the FLSA.

In _Walling,_ the Court explained that the FLSA does not cover a person who, "without promise or expectation of compensation, but solely for his personal purpose or pleasure, works in activities carried on by other persons either for their pleasure or profit." The Department of Labor makes the same distinction. _See_ United States Dep't of Labor Wage and Hour Division, Field Operations Handbook § 10b03(e) (activity of college students participating in interscholastic athletics primarily for their own benefit as part of the educational opportunities provided to the students by the school is not "work").

Plaintiffs alleged that their college athletic experiences constitute work. But that allegation has not been proven, and unlike in the independent-contractor and intern cases, it is not a given here. Even at the Rule 12(b)(6) stage, we "are not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation." _Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly,_ 550 U.S. 544, 555 (2007).

The majority opinion helpfully acknowledges this nettlesome issue. But in my view, its definitional test does not adequately probe the distinction between play and work, nor explain how district courts should do so. In the following sections, I will explain my other scruples about the majority's proposed test and offer some affirmative thoughts.

<p class="case-h1">V. The economic-reality test continues to apply in FLSA cases.</p>

Congress and the Supreme Court have created a patchwork of tests for determining employee status under federal labor and employment laws. Initially, the Court used an "economic realities" test in cases applying the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), FLSA, and Social Security Act (SSA). Almost immediately, Congress passed a joint resolution (the "Gearhart Resolution") rejecting the economic-realities test for the NLRA and SSA, and reiterating its intention that employee status under those statutes should be determined by traditional agency law principles. But Congress did not similarly amend the FLSA.

Since then, the Supreme Court has applied the common-law definition of "employee" to federal statutes that do not define "employee" or define it circularly. 

But the Court has continued to apply the economic-reality test in FLSA cases. 

So do other courts of appeals. 

Other courts wrestling with the FLSA-employee question in the specific context of student-athletes have also applied an economic-reality test. _See_ _Dawson v. Nat'l Collegiate Athletic Ass'n,_ 932 F.3d 905, 909 (9th Cir. 2019)_'; _Berger v. Nat'l Collegiate Athletic Ass'n,_ 843 F.3d 285, 290 (7th Cir. 2016).

So while I appreciate the majority's attempt to fashion a test using common-law agency principles from NLRA cases, I respectfully decline to join that analysis without clearer direction from the Supreme Court. Instead, I think that the proper test for this case is to determine the economic reality of the parties' relationships considering the circumstances of the whole activity.

<p class="case-h1">VI. The majority's test raises but does not answer some important questions.</p>

In addition to my doubts about relying on common-law agency principles in the FLSA context, I find the majority's four-part test wanting in some respects.

<p class="case-h2">a</p>

The test begins by asking whether the student-athlete performs "services" for his college or university. The majority does not define "services," but its test largely tracks the Restatement (Third) of Agency's definition of servant. That definition has not materially changed since the first Restatement of Agency (1933):

> A servant is a person employed to perform services for another in his affairs and who with respect to the physical conduct in the performance of the services is subject to the other's control or right to control.

Restatement (Third) of Agency § 220 (2006).

Webster's New International Dictionary 2288 (2d ed. 1950) defines "service" as the "performance of labor for the benefit of another or at another's command." _See also_ Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019) ("labor performed in the interest or under the direction of others"); Webster's New International Dictionary (3d ed. 1993) ("the performance of work commanded or paid for by another").

So the first part of the majority's test immediately raises—but does not clarify— the critical distinction between "service," "labor," or "work," as distinguished from play or sport. In a general sense, student-athletes serve the teams for which they play. But that is true of anyone who has ever played on a team: each player contributes her measure of skill and effort— her services, as it were—for the good of the entire team. That's the whole point of team sports. But one's contribution in the service of teamwork does not necessarily create an employment relationship.

<p class="case-h2">b</p>

The second part of the majority's test asks whether the student-athlete's team participation is necessarily and primarily for the university's benefit. Again, there is a sense in which student-athletes obviously play for the benefit of their university's team. The NCAA Transfer Portal offers student-athletes the flexibility each year to choose where they wish to play. Once the student-athlete chooses, he enrolls in his chosen college or university and becomes a member of its team. But that has little or nothing to do with employment status; it's a basic correlate of matriculation and team membership. Naturally, the student's athletic prowess benefits his chosen team and university because that is how team sports operate. Division I student-athletes play or provide athletic "services" for the benefit of their team just as Division II, Division III, and high school athletes play or provide athletic "services" for the benefit of their respective teams. But something more is required to convert the majority's university-as-beneficiary factor into a useful indicia of employment.

For example, in _Alamo Foundation,_ the religious foundation doubled as a commercial enterprise through its operation of profit-seeking "businesses serving the general public in competition with ordinary commercial enterprises." The enterprise included "service stations, retail clothing and grocery outlets, hog farms, roofing and electrical construction companies, a recordkeeping company, a motel, and companies engaged in the production and distribution of candy." The putative volunteers' work for those "ordinary commercial businesses" produced economic benefits for the foundation, so it was appropriate to characterize them as employees. Here, the factfinder should consider whether a university's sports team is (a) economically comparable to one of the Alamo Foundation's profit-seeking businesses, or (b) essentially an extra-curricular activity creating at best indirect and attenuated economic benefit for the university.

<p class="case-h2">c</p>

The third factor of the majority's test asks whether the student-athlete plays under the university's control or right of control. This principle of agency law is not particularly helpful in the context of intercollegiate sports. High school students do not set their own rules for recruitment and college students do not set their own rules for eligibility and participation. Such autonomy would invite chaos, undermine teamwork, and destroy competition. Because team sports are collective actions, all teams have coaches and administrators that evaluate players, assemble rosters, allocate playing time, make personnel changes, determine strategy, call plays, set practice and game schedules, arrange transportation, and so forth. The players do not act independently of each other and the coaches because, again, team sports are collective actions requiring significant direction and coordination. The control or right-of-control factor does not go very far to distinguish Division I athletes from Division II athletes, Division III athletes, or other organized team-sport participants.

<p class="case-h2">d</p>

The fourth factor of the majority's test asks whether the student-athlete provides services "in return for 'express' or 'implied' compensation of 'in-kind benefits.'" I agree that this factor is relevant to the work/play and employee/non-employee distinctions. The Supreme Court declared so in _Walling,_ and _Alamo Found._

In _Alamo Foundation,_ the Court held that self-proclaimed volunteers who were "entirely dependent upon the Foundation for long periods" were actually employees because they accepted "in-kind benefits... in exchange for their services." The benefits, according to the Court, amounted to "wages in another form." So even atypical modes of compensation can create employment relationships under the FLSA. What matters is the existence of some express or implied compensation arrangement and economic dependence. Theoretically, this approach might allow the would-be employer to avoid FLSA coverage simply by refusing to pay would-be employees as a matter of policy. But if the Supreme Court's compensation rule is enforced, such avoidance tactics will be futile. If universities offer in-kind benefits—such as, perhaps, scholarships that can be cancelled mid-year if an athlete quits her team—they must navigate the rule of _Alamo Foundation_.

What if an alleged employment relationship is voluntary and truly implicates no compensation arrangement or wage-like benefits for work in a commercial setting? In that case, the purported employee might be a "person who, without promise or expectation of compensation, but solely for his personal purpose or pleasure, works in activities carried on by other persons either for their pleasure or profit." The FLSA was "obviously not intended" to classify all such persons as employees, "otherwise, all students would be employees of the school or college they attended."

In _Alamo Foundation,_ the disguised wages were paid for work performed in the foundation's various commercial businesses. How those businesses compare to any given sports team at any given college is another knotty factual question. And although we may not consider facts that are not alleged in the FAC, the economic reality surrounding the compensation-bargain factor is in flux and will dramatically change even as the ink on this opinion is drying.

According to the majority, "profit" has always influenced "college athletics." The majority emphasizes the enormous revenue that "college athletes" generate annually. But revenue is not profit. And the majority's historical discussion diminishes the role of so-called nonrevenue generating sports at colleges and universities. In this pre-discovery posture, however, my general understanding is that for most student-athletes, the economic reality is that their athletic service, and their team's existence, is revenue-negative. Football Bowl Subdivision ("FBS") football and March Madness-level men's basketball are spectacular exceptions because they attract lucrative television deals.

Compared to FBS schools, the revenue vs. nonrevenue issue is presumably even more pronounced in the smaller Division I Football Championship Subdivision ("FCS") athletic programs. But the majority offers no guidance about how courts or factfinders applying an economic-reality test should consider student-athlete participation in nonrevenue sports. Are they part of the "business" of a college or university? For that matter, are athletics— though obviously important for various reasons—incidental to the university's business or essential to it? Does a college benefit from revenue-negative athletic programs? If so, how does that benefit differ from the cash produced by football, men's basketball, or the profit-seeking businesses in _Alamo Foundation?_ And how is the "economic reality" of a nonrevenue student-athlete's relationship with his university different from that of a musician whose performing arts scholarship is conditioned on her time-consuming participation in a band or orchestra? Or from a member of the school's competitive esports team who may also receive a scholarship? We cannot begin to answer such questions in this interlocutory appeal. Nor can they be answered in gross. The answers will likely differ among individuals, teams, sports, and schools.

I tend to agree with Judge Hamilton's intuition that the economic-reality question probably shakes out differently for FBS football players and March Madness-level men's basketball players than it does for other student-athletes. _See_ _Berger v. NCAA,_ 843 F.3d 285, 294 (7th Cir. 2016) (Hamilton, J., concurring). _See also_ _NCAA v. Alston,_ 594 U.S. 69, 141 S. Ct. 2141, 2166-69, 210 L.Ed.2d 814 (2021) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring) (focusing on the "enormous sums of money" generated in college athletics and noting distinction between revenue and "nonrevenue-raising sports"); _Agnew v. NCAA,_ 683 F.3d 328, 340-41 (7th Cir. 2012) (positing a relevant labor market, for purposes of the Sherman Act, consisting of "big-time college football programs"). That is a factual matter that the parties can develop in discovery. But any test that purports to gauge "economic reality" must be sensitive to the glaring difference between revenue generating and nonrevenue intercollegiate sports.

<p class="case-h1">VII. The FLSA-employee test should account for longstanding precedent and existing law.</p>

For over 65 years, courts across the country have determined that student-athletes do not qualify as employees of their universities. 

As the Supreme Court emphasized in the antitrust context, changing market realities can throw such precedent into doubt. But in that event, our test for employee status under the FLSA should isolate the changed facts and market realities that distinguish the venerable line of precedent. Again, that exercise may highlight the growth of a unique and robust labor market for FBS football and Division I basketball players. 

This case also presents difficult collateral legal issues that should give us pause. For example, the related-statutes canon requires harmonious interpretation of statutes. Employee-employer relationships are governed by Title VII, among other things, but Title VII's prohibition against employment discrimination because of sex sits uneasily with Title IX regulations and policy interpretations mandating equal "participation opportunities" (read, "participants") between the two sexes. FLSA employee status for student-athletes would also roil the percolating debate under Title IX over transgender athletes' participation on opposite-sex teams because Title VII, which would apply to collegiate athletics if student-athletes have employee status under FLSA, prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of gender identity. The notion that sports are integral to a university's educational purpose, rather than employment programs themselves, is the basis for several tax-advantageous rules benefitting universities and student-athletes, such as unrelated business income tax, and the taxation of athletic scholarships. And our disposition of this interlocutory appeal could impact student-athletes' eligibility for federal student aid, state worker's compensation regimes, student-athletes' immigration status, and the employment status of students participating in other college-supervised extracurricular activities. These potentially disruptive collateral effects implicate many other statutory schemes, revealing the legislative rather than adjudicative nature of plaintiffs' claims and providing another reason to slow down and proceed warily.

<p class="case-h1">VIII. Conclusion</p>

To the extent that the majority holds simply that it is factually possible for a Division I student-athlete to be an employee under the FLSA, I concur in that judgment.