---
title: Beyond Feudalism
subtitle: Chapter 3
author: Karen Orren 
---

### Karen Orren, Belated Feudalism: The Order of the Workplace in Late-Nineteenth Century America

[W]hen the United Stated embarked upon full-scale industrialization in the decades following the Civil War, American labor relations were a remnant of the ancient order, in the sense that arrangement established in England in previous centuries were carried forward and enforced in law, often with only slight modification, to form the framework of relations between American employers and their employees. ... 

[C]ertain considerations should be understood as fundamental. The  first is that employment relations, being a vestige of the old order, were still governed by the judiciary. As a consequence, historical continuity will be observed in the ancient precedents used by judges to decide disputes between employers and employees, and sometimes also third parties, who came before the American courts. ... [I]n this chapter I discuss the substance of governance, including the *prescriptive* nature of the common law, the enforcement of rules existing a priori, in contrast to the voluntary principles associated with the modern idea of contract. In fact, wage workers had traditionally worked, or "served," under contracts, but for the vast majority those were what are known as implied contracts, rather than express contracts, the contents of implied contracts being predetermined and legally assumed to have been agreed to by the parties upon the act of hiring. On those occasions when express contracts were entered into, as with respect to the specific time or job for which the contract was to run, courts also interpreted their provisions in light of the older rules. In other words, in settling labor disputes that came before them, the judges were imposing a long-established structure of relations upon employer and employee, not arbitrating between two parties who had entered, de novo as in contract theory, into an agreement. 

[ *** ]

#### The order of labor 

At the most abstract level, "feudal" refers to the fact that the hierarchical relation of master and servant in nineteenth-century America was a remnant of the larger system of hierarchies that historically had extended up and down medieval society. ... 

[L]aborers in the Middle Ages were an order in society in three aspects: Laborers were participants in the specific hierarchy of master and servant. They occupied a designated status within society at large. And, as both of those, laborers were an incorporation of the larger moral system of being and acting that was the reason of social existence. Although certain details would change, those aspects continued to characterize labor regulation in the late nineteenth century. The rules of the workplace, the material requirements of society, the civilization of legality---each reacted upon the others, coloring and intensifying and justifying the others. 

 [ *** ]  Under its own name, the relation of master and servant did not appear in English common law until the promulgation … of the first Statutes of Labourers …  in 1349. Prior to that time, artisans and wage workers had been regulated by rules and customs of manors, boroughs, and guilds. During the fourteenth century, the law governing wage labor became intermeshed with certain disabilities of the villeins, peasants bound from birth to specified services to a lord. That legal commingling reflect the fact that former villeins, having commuted their labor services to money rents, were gradually coming to make up the great bulk of wage laborers; judges, themselves mostly landed, undertook to protect the lord's powers during the transition. … [T]he task required greater reliance on a central state to enforce privileges that had earlier been secured by the customs of the manor and the lord's military force; thus the Statutes of Labourers and the new special constables, justices of the peace, appointed to enforce the statutes. 

This history is instructive on the persistence of the employment hierarchy at a time when feudal lords were increasingly being replaces by---and were themselves becoming---masters who hired workers under contract, as well as later, when the relation of master and servant persisted after other hierarchies, in religion and commerce as well as government, had been dismantled. … Blackstone's _Commentaries_, written in the eighteenth century, grouped the duties and obligations between master and servant with those between husband and wife, parent and child, and guardian and ward, to make up what he referred to as the private economical relations of persons. Those he distinguished from the public relations, between magistrates and people, among whom were included knights, barons, clergy, kind, and other figures in the medieval lawbooks. In his description of the public relations, hierarchy had been overtaken by the functional position of those relations in English government and the emphasis on the supremacy of Parliament. The private relations, however, retained the pattern of personal subordination. By that time, the villein had vanished; Blackstone did not mention him, but instead contrasted the free laborer of England with the condition of the slave. 

Let us begin this exploration of the order of master and servant with the structure of compulsion that underlay the industrial system and provided one of the surest and most venerable indications that being a worker in late-nineteenth century America was still a legal _status_. By "status," I refer to an established position in society conferred upon an individual that does not arise from any specific action or from a contract bu from the individual's personal characteristics. Nothing in American law directly stated that being a worker was a status or that there was a legal duty to work. Nevertheless, in every jurisdiction in the United States, not to work or be seeking work, if one was an able-bodied person without other visible means of support, was a crime, punishable by fine or imprisonment.  … Moreover, just as being a worker was a status, this crime, known as vagrancy, was one of the few acknowledged crimes of status in American law---that is, one that was not defined by an action or inaction taken in itself bu was committed purely through one's personal condition, by being a member of some predefined legal category.  … [T]he word _personal_ must be emphasized. In the same way that an employee's contract of employment was treated by the law as personal, as a relation between particular individuals, not simply and exchange of labor where somebody else without further agreement could person the job, the crime of vagrancy could not be committed jointly or in concert. 

[T]he Statutes of Labourers (1349) presented the first comprehensive scheme in which the worker's failure to work was suppressed through the apparatus of the criminal law. In the text, situated between the provision that victuals [^Orren1] must be sold at reasonable prices and the provision that a laborer accepting more wages than customary must pay the surplus to the town, appears the following: 

> Item, because that many valiant [able-bodied] beggars, as long as they may live of begging do refuse to labour, giving themselves to idleness and vice, and sometime to theft and other abominations; none upon the said pain of imprisonment shall, under the coulour of pity of alms, give anything to such, which may labour, or presume to favour them towards their desires, so that therby they may be compelled to labour for their necessary being. 

[^Orren1]: 
	[~] Food or provisions
	
Those statutes, which were enforced in the British colonies, went essentially unchanged into the eighteenth century, when they were grafted onto the laws of the new American statutes. The same configuration of meanings and policies in the old laws carried on into the nineteenth century. … Over the centuries, the vagrancy laws continued as a moral structure impinging just outside, an element of … the relational dimension of labor relations, the manner in which they bear on and support the activities of other groups in society. The worker must be working; if not working, he or she is bound to lapse into crime; in no case may the worker be allowed to rely on the charity of the community, especially a community away from the worker's original home. That structure, having long preceded the market system under capitalism, later thrived in the era of capitalist development, despite market society's alleged emphasis on the seeking of opportunity, mobility, and the breaking of local ties. … 

The vagrancy statutes were only one aspect of the labor law that attested to the wage workers' emergence out of the status of villenage. Although the legal relation of master and servant already existed to take them in---just as it would take in the swelling ranks of industrial workers some six centuries later---certain overtly servile principles derived from the old connection were never expunged. Another such principle … was _quicquid acquietur servo acquietur domino_ ("whatever is acquired by the servant is acquired by the master"). … [That] principle … was continued in the law of master and servant. A note in Hargrave's eighteeth-century edition of Coke's _Institutes_ [^Orren2] observed that the rule "about _slaves_ holds _in some degree_ in respect to _apprentices_ and _servants_" and that it pertained with certainty to wages a worker earned from other employment when the master had given permission to the other employer without waiving the earnings. … 

[^Orren2]: 
	[~] The _Institutes of the Lawes of England_ are a series of legal treatises written by Sir Edward Coke, a prominent English barrister, judge and politician in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. 

By the late nineteenth century, employers in the United States could sue workers for breach of contract for their earnings in other employment only when it could be shown that the work had been done during hours and activities in which the plaintiff employer had been entitled to the worker's efforts. In an 1877 _Treatise on the Law of Master and Servant_, however, Horace Wood[^Orren3] devoted three full pages to Hargrave's "learned note" and concluded that under the rule of _quicquid acquietur servo_ the employer could also retain waged earned by a worker in outside activities if the money somehow came into the employer's hands. … Moreover, even in its diluted American form, the law expressed the employer's proprietary interest not only in the worker's labor performed under the contract but also in all labor that might be performed by the worker's _person_, under a different contract, The remedy went beyond simply dismissing the worker or deducting from his wages for so many hours; it extended to the outside earnings acquired, as if they (as an extension of the worker) belonged to the master. Such a principle would seem incongruous not simply with the market-model morality of enterprising employees, but even with the more sober depictions of nineteenth-century workers as earnest breadwinners for their families. It was eminently compatible, however, … with other features, likewise ancient, of the hierarchical structure of employment relations during the period. 

[^Orren3]:
	[~] Wood's treatise was an influential work on the law governing employment in the late 19th century. Among other things, it is widely cited as the primary source of the employment-at-will rule. See Jay M. Feinman, The Development of the Employment at Will Rule, 20 American Journal of Legal History 118, 125-27 (1976).

#### The judicial governance of master and servant

[ *** ]

The links between past and present may be observed in the line of precedents used by American judges to decide the disputes between masters and servants and third parties that came before the courts. Apart from the continuity inherent in precedents, however, their importance in labor relations stems from the prescriptive character of that law. To the extent that even the mere adherence to established procedures may bias decisions in favor of one group in society over another, all law may be said to be prescriptive, if only incidentally so. But in the law of master and servant, the judges imposed its provisions as the content of the contract between employers and employees, unless there was an explicit agreement to the contrary, which was almost never the case. …  

Regarding whether or not an employee might recover wages if asked by an employer to work on a Sunday, Wood proceeds for several pages citing precedents and authorities that include, among others, practice prior to the year 500, Edward the Confessor,[^Orren4] _The Mirror of Justices_,[^Orren5] and Lord Coke, reaching the conclusion that the worker may not. The point is not only that the courts followed precedent, and the precedents were ancient, but also that there was a preestablished substance that constituted the legal relations between the parties, which the courts administered in the course of litigation. 

[^Orren4]:
	[~] Edward the Confessor was the English king from 1042 to 1066. 
	
[^Orren5]: 
	[~] _The Mirror of Justices_ was an Anglo-Norman law text published in 1642. 
	
[ *** ] As a remnant of feudalism, judicial regulation of labor relations in the nineteenth century maintained that comprehensive sense of governance, in which courts administered, and to a lesser extent, legislated, as well as adjudicated. Thus, for example, by the mid-nineteenth century, American courts, running ahead of the English, no longer permitted employers to beat their employees. Similarly, in the 1880s, judge-made law turned away from the assumption of an annual hiring, based on the English model and on the prevalence of agricultural labor, to a hiring "at-will." Such modifications were no doubt responsible for the system's survival for so long, preempting interference by other agencies of the state in unusually offensive or inconvenient circumstances. Even so, as in the case of at-will employment, the courts continued to prescribe labor relations, not derive them from contracts devised by the parties. In any case, such judicial legislation was the exception; usually courts imposed existing law. … My claim is not that judges were forced in every circumstance to follow common-law precedent, rather than ignore it, or that they could not have found formal justification in existing law for more innocations. The argument is that in by far the largest share of disputes before them, they did in fact follow precedent. I certainly do not mean to imply that the common-law rules were in any sense "neutral," but quite the opposite, that judges by their ritual enforcement held up a structure of domination that had existed since time out of mind. 

Judicial governance of labor relations in the nineteenth century may best be seen in the details of cases that came regularly to the courts for decision and engaged central principles of the law. One principle was the property interest that the master legally had in the worker's labor, and indeed in all labor performed by the worker's person during the hours for which they contracted, as mentioned earlier in regard to the rule of _quicquid acquietur servo_. That property interest was further enforced in the action _per quod servitium amisit_ ("by which the master lost the service"). In that action, the master might claim damages from a third party for injuries to his worker that resulted in loss of value of the worker's services, must as if the injury had been to his chattel or machines or buildings. … Blackstone, typically, found a parallel action regarding servants in ancient Athens; however, his discussion was more pertinent for its stress on the traditional nonreciprocity (in the _per quod_ respect, as in others) of the employment contract: The servant, having no property in the "company, care, or assistance of the superior," has no legal redress for injuries to the master. 

[ *** ]

A different line of ancient precedent may be observed for a second principle in nineteenth-century labor law, the principle that a contract for labor was "entire." Under that principle, a worker hired for a stated job or period of time was not legally entitled to be paid for any labor performed until the job or term was completed. If he or she quit work without legal cause, nothing could be recovered for the labor performed, unless the employee could prove that the contract had been wrongfully terminated by the employer. In that circumstance, wages could be sought by a _quantum meruit_ ("for the amount owed") suit or by a suit for damages for breach of contract. Legal recovery was difficult, not only because of the wide latitude given employers to discharge their workers but also because the courts were willing to accepts as a justification for dismissal virtually any reason, even if that reason had not been stated or even known by the employer himself at the time the dismissal took place. If the suit was for damages, workers were required under the law to seek other employment after their dismissal, and the court normally would deduct any wages they received from what it required the defendant employer to pay. 

This rule made it possible for employers to goad employees into quitting near the end of a term or pay period, and thereby benefit from their earlier labor without having to pay. But the "entire" contract principle was also basic to the full range of subject matters in dispute between nineteenth-century employers and employees, because very often other issues presented at law involved the question of whether or not a worker was entitled to, or had been unjustifiably denied, payment for his or her services. The principle was most important during the decades prior to the Civil War, when contracts definite as to term were more common than they would be later, but it retained its vitality after then as well, particularly with respect to salaried workers. The principle of hiring "at will," under which either party could terminate the contract for any reason, began to take hold in the 1880s; but in the meantime many courts … continued to apply the English rule of an assumed annual hiring, or else held that the pay period (by the week, month, etc.) would determine the point at which back wages could be accrued and recovered. 

[ *** ]

#### The province of work 

The principles of hierarchy and obedience imply the existence of jurisdictional boundaries within which authority is organized and enforced. … Enough has been said by now about the hierarchy of master and servant, and the authoritative endorsement of the master's will by the courts, to identify the workplace as a jurisdiction. [ *** ] 

[J]urisdiction was an attribute of the master's property in the servant, jst as was the claim over the servant's labor. Concretely, the workplace, and the persons and property that composed it, _was_ a jurisdiction. To the extent that workplaces relations under the nineteenth-century law of master and servant were governed by the courts as a unit, the combined workplaces … constituted, concretely and not metaphorically, a single province of work within the larger territory of American society. It could be put on a map. 

Inside the province were the inhabitants: the employer and his employees. Those were real persons, not their alienated labor or functions. … [I]t was legal cause for immediate discharge to bring in an outside worker without the master's consent to substitute for the one hired to do the work. Once having entered the contract for services, the worker was enlisted to be there and to perform during working hours, upon penalty of losing back pay for an infraction. … [A]bsense by mistake of a few days could cause discharge. The worker was not released from a tour of duty even under such circumstances as his or her accurate knowledge of the master's imminent bankruptcy. [ *** ]

Beyond the territory of the individual workplace itself, the inhabitants, both employer and employees, engaged in what might be referred to as interworkplace relations, that is, transactions with other employers and employees. Although easy movement across that boundary would seem natural in market-model societies, real crossings encountered fixed barriers. In the case of employees, for example, a kind of passport often was required to move from the hire of one employer to another, which was the testimonial letter. Such letters were necessary to obtain wage work in the Middle Ages; a statute under Richard II in 1388 imposed forty days imprisonment for forging such a letter and penalized an employer who hired a servant who did not present one. In the late nineteenth century, testimonial letters were required to obtain employment in many major industries, and litigation arose over questions of whether or not previous employers were under legal obligation to furnish them, how complete and truthful they were required to be, and how many times they had to be provided. Another barrier to employees' free movement was that in nineteenth-century America, as in fourteenth-century England, it was illegal to harbor servants of another employer, that is, to employ a worker while knowing that he or she was still under a contract of employment with someone else. It was not essential that it be shown that the new labor had actually commences, or that there had been an intention to deprive the first employer of his worker's services; the mere retention of the employee after learning that service was due the other employer was subject to common-law suit for damages. 

Crossings of workplace boundaries met numerous other obstacles. One obstacle was the courts' enforcement of private agreements whereby the employee, upon departing service, agreed not to enter in business competition with his or her former employer for a specified number or years or over a specific territory. Another was the enforcement of what employers claimed were implied (as well as express) contracts that employees would not pass on to other certain "trade secrets," even though the machinery or processes were already known by others and were unprotected by patents. Although contracts like these are certainly familiar in the recent history of American commerce, in relations among businessmen they had a controversial status, being regarded as illegal restraints of trade, and were not enforced consistently until late in the nineteenth century. But contrast, in the master-servant context, such contracts had long been regarded as reasonable exceptions necessary for the educative and confidential relations of employment. …

Of the several protective barriers surrounding the workplace, the most formidable in the law of master and servant was the provision against enticement. The Statutes of Labourers provided for both civil and criminal proceedings against any person who knowingly enticed or persuaded a servant away from his employment by another master. By 1355, an action of trespass on the case had developed; it provided an independent civil remedy of damages for those same infractions within the common law. The law of enticement is a vivid illustration of the persistence of ancient regulations into the modern period. In the leading antebellum case, _Boston Glass Manufactory v. Binney_ (1827), plaintiffs based their argument on cases extending back as far as 1591, and the 1591 case had been based on precedents for the action of enticement dating from the fourteenth century. 

[ *** ]

Beyond the outer perimeter of the province of work lay the public at large. The relations between the workplace at what in the parlance of contract was called "all the world" may be seen … in the developing law of employer liability for injuries caused in the course of carrying on a trade or business. With respect to "strangers," third parties outside the company, the rule of _respondeat superior_ ("let the mater answer") prevailed … . That rule meant that the employer was liable for injuries inflicted through the fault of an employee performing his authorized duties, just as if the injury had been caused by the employer's machine or animal. Because prior to that time employees had themselves been held liable, unless the particular negligent act in question had been specifically commanded or implied by the mater, we may speculate that the newer rule, which in any case did not repudiate but broadened the premise of command, was an adaptation to the more attenuated forms of management typical of larger companies. 

[ *** ]

On the other hand, on the basis of the 1842 landmark case of _Farwell v. Boston & Worcester Rail Road_, when an injury was inflicted on an employee through negligence of a fellow servant, the master was not responsible. That judgment was consistent with the idea that the law must protect the public; however, judges would not intrude in established master-servant relations to protect the employee. [ *** ]

In his opinion in _Farwell_, Massachusetts Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw rested his finding of nonliability of the employer on the nature of the original contract of employment. Averrring that injuries to "strangers" must, for reasons of general considerations of policy and security, be covered by the maxim _respondeat superior_, Shaw distinguished the circumstances at bar: 

> But this does not apply to the case of a servant bringing his action against his own employer to recover damages for an injury arising in the course of that employment, where all such risks and perils as the employer and the servant respectively intend to assume and bear may be regulated by the express or implied contract between them, and which, in contemplation of law, must be presumed to be thus regulated. 

[ *** ]

Under the rules of liability, then, employees stood in relation to one another as an employee would to a piece of machinery. The employer would be held liable for an injury inflicted by a fellow employee only if the employer had not taken due care to ensure that the employee at fault had been sufficiently skilled to perform the task, just as the employer would be held liable if he or she had neglected to care for a piece of machinery. [ *** ]

Here the worker may be seen to have had less protection than members of the public at large against identical injuries caused by identical accidents. By virtue of one's status as an employee of the … company in the course of whose business the injury occurred, one was unprotected against injuries for which the company would have assumed liability had they been inflicted on an ordinary member of the public. … [T]he evident injustice of the fellow-servant rule, which adversely affected the families and other associates of injured workers, as well as the workers themselves, would eventually lead to a major revolution in torts through the institution of workmen's compensation laws. Those laws would bring new inroads into the domain of master and servant. However, at a time when court decisions in other areas of the law were moving in the direction of universal contracts, the effect of workers' compensation laws was to enhance the status-based responsibilities of the employment relation. 

#### The province and the republic 

A final barrier against interference in the workplace was constitutional. Labor relations were bounded by the limits of legislative sovereignty. Regular payment of wages, and in money rather than scrip or credit; reasons for discharge, and wages due and service letters upon departure; removal of the fellow-servant defense against liability for injury; shorter hours of employment---these and other changes in the old law were obtained by workers and their political allies in legislation, through the activities of lobbying and elections. However, as is well known, in the majority of instances those statutes were overturned in review by the judiciary. [ *** ]

[The courts' behavior] demonstrated a concerted institutional defense of the labor remnant of feudal governance against legislative encroachment. That defense has been obscured because it coincided with the judiciary's simultaneous retreat from its earlier deferential position on business legislation and relied on a new theory of substantive due process to obstruct a diversity of economic statutes, not only statutes affecting labor. 

[W]ithin the broad doctrine of substantive due process, "liberty of contract" came closest to denying the validity of legislation per se. [ *** ] Among the subjects treated by the judges under the doctrine of liberty of contract, labor questions were in the forefront. The initial reference to "undue interference with men's rights of making contracts" appeared as a dictum in an opinion of the Illinois Supreme Court on legislation specifying how coal should be weighed to calculate miners' wages. The first decision to invalidate a statute as an unconstitutional infringement on liberty of contract was _Godcharles v. Wigeman_, overturning a Pennsylvania statute requiring iron mills to pay in cash. The first U.S. Supreme Court decision to invalidate a state statute based on liberty of contract was _Lochner v. New York_. [ *** ]

The opinions in the labor decisions indicate that the judges believed that what was at stake was no less than the moral order of things, not merely the formal division of powers or the privileges of favorite social groups. Their well-known opposition to "class" legislation was based not so much on a sense of insult to republic principles as on their fears that the entire system of society and politics faced imminent demolition should the relation of master and servant be upset. This is revealed, I think, in the continual reasoning by _reductio ad absurdum_, a determination to foresee the worst imaginable logical outcome. In _Lochner_, Justice Peckham said that if an eight-hour law for bakers were condoned, personal liberty under the constitution would become "visionary": 

> Not only the hours of employees, but the hours of employers, could be regulated, and doctors, lawyers, scientists, all professional men, as well as athletes and artisans, could be forbidden to fatigue their brains and bodies by prolonged hours of exercise, lest the fighting strength of the state be impaired. 



