{\rtf1\ansi\deff4\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Crimson Text;}{\f5\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Times New Roman;}{\f6\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Arial;}{\f7\fnil\fprq0\fcharset128 Georgia;}{\f8\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Noto Sans CJK SC;}{\f9\fswiss\fprq0\fcharset128 Lucida Sans;}{\f10\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Lucida Sans;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red119\green119\blue119;\red31\green31\blue31;\red33\green33\blue33;\red170\green170\blue170;\red85\green85\blue85;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052 Normal;}
{\*\cs15\snext15\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 1;}
{\*\cs16\snext16\loch\cf9\ul\ulc0 Hyperlink;}
{\*\cs17\snext17\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 2;}
{\*\cs18\snext18\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b ListLabel 3;}
{\*\cs19\snext19\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\super\f5\fs16\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 4;}
{\*\cs20\snext20\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\super\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 5;}
{\*\cs21\snext21\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 6;}
{\*\cs22\snext22\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0 ListLabel 7;}
{\s23\sbasedon0\snext24\rtlch\af10\afs28 \ltrch\hich\af4\loch\sb240\sa120\keepn\f4\fs28\dbch\af8 Heading;}
{\s24\sbasedon0\snext24\loch\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Body Text;}
{\s25\sbasedon24\snext25\rtlch\af9 \ltrch\hich\af4\loch\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\f4 List;}
{\s26\sbasedon0\snext26\rtlch\af9\afs24\ai \ltrch\hich\af4\loch\sb120\sa120\noline\f4\fs24\i Caption;}
{\s27\sbasedon0\snext27\rtlch\af9 \ltrch\hich\af4\loch\noline\f4 Index;}
{\s28\sbasedon0\snext28 Header and Footer;}
{\s29\sbasedon28\snext29 Header;}
{\s30\sbasedon28\snext30 Footer;}
{\s31\sbasedon0\snext31\loch\nowidctlpar\noline Table Contents;}
{\s32\sbasedon31\snext32\rtlch\ab \ltrch\loch\qc\nowidctlpar\noline\b Table Heading;}
}{\*\generator LibreOffice/24.2.7.2$Linux_X86_64 LibreOffice_project/420$Build-2}{\info{\creatim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}{\author Eric M. Fink}{\revtim\yr2025\mo11\dy12\hr15\min25}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}{\*\userprops}\deftab720
\hyphauto1\viewscale120\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1080\margr1080\margt720\margb720\sectd\sbknone\sftnnar\saftnnrlc\sectunlocked1\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1080\margrsxn1080\margtsxn720\margbsxn720\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\qj\fi0\li0\lin0\ri0\rin0\ltrpar\hich\af5\loch\cf18\fs20\i0\b0\f5\loch

\par \sect\sectd\sftnnar\saftnnrlc\sectunlocked1\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1080\margrsxn1080\margtsxn720\margbsxn720\ltrsect\sbknone\pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Clark v. Carter, No. 2:23-cv-00054-JMS-MG (S.D. Ind. Feb. 27, 2025)}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Ponie Clark is a prisoner at Wabash Valley Correctional Facility (WVCF). While incarcerated at WVCF, he worked in a call center operated on the prison grounds by a private company. He is pursuing claims against agents of the Indiana Department of Correction (IDOC) and the call center under the Fair Labor Standards Act\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s (FLSA) minimum wage, overtime, and retaliation provisions and under the Fourteenth Amendment\u8217\'81\'66s equal protection clause.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The defendants seek to dismiss all Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s claims pursuant to \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000600&cite=USFRCPR12&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_61d20000b6d76" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6)}{}}}\loch
 for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted. For the reasons that follow, the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 motions are denied as to Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims and granted as to his equal protection claims.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The IDOC and its subdivision Indiana Correctional Industries (ICI) have set up joint ventures at their prisons. In these joint ventures, IDOC inmates provide labor to private companies that produce goods or offer services for profit.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Three joint ventures operate at WVCF: the wire shop, the sewing shop, and the call center. Dkt. 60 at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 33. A different business operates each venture. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 35. None produces \u8220\'81\'67a good or service which further[s] Indiana\u8217\'81\'66s penological interests,\u8221\'81\'68 id., which the Court understands to mean that the joint ventures do not generate operating revenues for the IDOC or produce goods or services that are used to operate the prison or defray the costs of operating the prison. For example, the sewing shop does not produce inmates\u8217\'81\'66 jumpsuits or correctional officers\u8217\'81\'66 uniforms.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Although they operate at WVCF with inmate labor, the joint ventures operate as private businesses. Employees of the private businesses hire, fire, and directly supervise inmate workers with no direction from the IDOC. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 34.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
From September 30, 2019, until November 11, 2021, Mr. Clark worked at the call center. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7\u182\'81\'f7 16\uc1 \u8211\'3f17. The call center was and is operated by Capital Accounts, LLC, and corporate relatives Synergetic Communication, Inc., and Phone Verifications, LLC. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 14. For simplicity, the Court refers to these entities collectively as \u8220\'81\'67Capital Accounts\u8221\'81\'68 and to the entities and their employees as the \u8220\'81\'67corporate defendants.\u8221\'81\'68\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Mr. Clark was interviewed and selected for employment at the call center by Capital Accounts employees. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 15. He was supervised by a Capital Accounts employee. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 19. His employment was \u8220\'81\'67non-mandatory.\u8221\'81\'68 Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 16. The Court understands this to mean that he was not required by any prison official or policy to work in the call center and that, if he chose not to work at the call center, he would not have been subject to disciplinary action.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s duties included \u8220\'81\'67calling various clients and prospects\u8221\'81\'68 and sending e-mails. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7\u182\'81\'f7 25\uc1 \u8211\'3f26. Mr. Clark was directed by his supervisors, who were Capital Accounts employees, to identify himself \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67as an account manager with\u8221\'81\'68 Capital Accounts. Id. His supervisors sometimes directed him to engage in unethical or unlawful conduct, including misrepresenting how accounts worked, fabricating stories in response to questions, and violating \u8220\'81\'67do not call\u8221\'81\'68 list requirements. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7\u182\'81\'f7 30\uc1 \u8211\'3f31. His supervisor, who was a Capital Accounts employee, threatened to terminate his employment if he did not follow these directions. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 32.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Capital Accounts set Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s wages and paid into his inmate trust account through ICI. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 19. He began at $0.50 per hour and, after five raises, topped out at $1.50 per hour. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 21. ICI and its employees have allowed Capital Accounts to set these pay rates. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 20. Capital Accounts set these pay rates to maximize its profits. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 37.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The other privately operated joint ventures at WVCF\uc2 \u8212\'81\'5cthe wire shop and the sewing shop\u8212\'81\'5cpay inmate workers at rates \uc1 }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_931_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_931_1}*931 comparable to non-inmate employees, up to $18.00 per hour. Id. at \uc2 \u182\'81\'f7 41. Mr. Clark \u8220\'81\'67met, and meets, all of the qualifications for employment in\u8221\'81\'68 the wire shop and the sewing shop. Id. at \u182\'81\'f7 42. The complaint provides no information about the duties or tasks performed by wire shop and sewing shop workers.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f91769169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f91769169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f91769169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f91769169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
#### III. FLSA Claims}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The FLSA directs that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67[e]very employer shall pay to each of his employees\u8221\'81\'68 a minimum wage, which currently stands at $7.25 per hour\u8212\'81\'5cnearly five times Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s top wage at the call center. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS206&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_8b3b0000958a4" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 206(a)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
. The FLSA further directs that employers must pay a higher rate for overtime work, see }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS207&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_8b3b0000958a4" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 207(a)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
, and that they may not discharge or discriminate against employees who seek to vindicate their rights under the FLSA, see }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS215&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_28cc0000ccca6" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 215(a)(3)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The FLSA serves a twofold purpose. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_810&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_810" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike v. Peters, 974 F.2d 806, 810 (7th Cir. 1992)}{}}}\loch
. First, by imposing minimum labor standards, it seeks to eliminate conditions detrimental to worker health, efficiency, and general well-being. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 (citing }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1960122466&pubNum=0000780&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_780_292&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_780_292" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Mitchell v. Robert Demario Jewelry, 361 U.S. 288, 292, 80 S.Ct. 332, 4 L.Ed.2d 323 (1960)}{}}}\loch
; }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS202&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_8b3b0000958a4" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 202(a)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
). Second, by imposing a minimum wage, it seeks \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67to prevent unfair competition in commerce from the use of underpaid labor.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 (citing }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS202&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_8b3b0000958a4" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 202(a)(3)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
).}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The defendants seek dismissal of Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims on the exclusive ground that he is not an \u8220\'81\'67employee\u8221\'81\'68 within the meaning of the FLSA. More specifically, they seek dismissal on the exclusive ground that Mr. Clark cannot be an employee because he was incarcerated while working at the call center.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
If inmates are excluded from the FLSA, it is \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67only because of presumed legislative intent and not because of anything in the actual text of the FLSA.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett v. Frank, 395 F.3d 409, 409 (7th Cir. 2005)}{}}}\loch
. Under the FLSA, an \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67employee\u8221\'81\'68 is simply \u8220\'81\'67any individual employed by an employer.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS203&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_06a60000dfdc6" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 203(e)(1)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
. An \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67employer\u8221\'81\'68 is \u8220\'81\'67any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an employee.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS203&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_5ba1000067d06" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 203(d)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
. An employer employs an individual if it suffers or permits the individual to work. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS203&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_16f4000091d86" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 203(g)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
. Based solely on the statutory text, there is no reason why a prisoner cannot be an employee. Indeed, the statute specifically identifies certain individuals who are not \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67employees,\u8221\'81\'68 but none of these exceptions refer to incarceration. See \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS203&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RB&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_4b250000f9dd6" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
29 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 203(e)(3)\uc1 }{}}}\loch
\u8211\'3f}{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=29USCAS203&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RE&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_b222000026321" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
(e)(5)}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Further, no controlling Seventh Circuit precedent supports the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 position that Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s incarceration alone precludes him from FLSA coverage. In fact, in \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike v. Peters, 974 F.2d 806 (7th Cir. 1992)}{}}}\loch
, the Seventh Circuit held that a worker\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s coverage under the FLSA requires a fact-intensive inquiry\u8212\'81\'5can inquiry that the defendants have not undertaken here. Further, in \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, the Seventh Circuit endorsed decisions holding that incarceration does not preclude FLSA coverage where the prisoner performs work for a third party and the work is unrelated to operation of the prison. Decisions from other courts in this Circuit do not call for a different outcome. Accordingly, this Court denies the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 motion based on the clear guidance provided by the Seventh Circuit in the cases on which the defendants rely.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f976a0169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
##### A. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Carter v. Dutchess Community College}{}}}\loch
: \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67[A]n inmate may be entitled under the law to receive the federal minimum wage.\u8221\'81\'68\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The defendants build their argument that the FLSA never protects prisoners on snippets from three Seventh Circuit decisions: }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike v. Peters, 974 F.2d 806 (7th Cir. 1992)}{}}}\loch
, }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_932_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_932_1}*932 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett v. Frank, 395 F.3d 409 (7th Cir. 2005)}{}}}\loch
, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_814&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_814" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders v. Hayden, 544 F.3d 812, 814 (7th Cir. 2008)}{}}}\loch
. All three precedents remain good law, but none dealt with the facts of this case. Moreover, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 recognize that the Second Circuit provided the correct framework for resolving the facts Mr. Clark alleges in }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter v. Dutchess Community College, 735 F.2d 8 (2d Cir. 1984)}{}}}\loch
. Therefore, this Court follows the Seventh Circuit\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s guidance and begins its analysis with \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Carter was an inmate at a New York state prison. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_10&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_10" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
735 F.2d at 10}{}}}\loch
. Dutchess Community College offered courses to inmates, and Carter worked as a teaching assistant. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 Like Mr. Clark, Carter was selected by the College, and he performed his duties at the prison under the supervision of the College\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s staff. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 He was paid $1.20 per hour\uc2 \u8212\'81\'5cless than the minimum wage in 1980, but nearly as much as Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s top wage at the call center 40 years later. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_11&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_11" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 11}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The Second Circuit considered \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67whether prisoners ever may be considered employees for the purposes of the minimum wage provisions of the FLSA.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_12&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_12" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 12}{}}}\loch
. It squarely rejected the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 assertion that prisoners cannot be FLSA employees and held \u8220\'81\'67that an inmate may be entitled under the law to receive the federal minimum wage from an outside employer.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_13&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_13" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 13\u8211\'3f14}{}}}\loch
. Incarceration is not dispositive. Rather, to determine whether any worker is a FLSA \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67employee,\u8221\'81\'68 a \u8220\'81\'67full inquiry into the true economic reality is necessary.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_14&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_14" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. At 14}{}}}\loch
.}{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_fnRef_B00012082982417_ID0EADBG_1}{\*\bkmkend co_fnRef_B00012082982417_ID0EADBG_1}[^clark1]}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6f9d5d7169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
##### B. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
: Totality of the Circumstances and Economic Reality}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The defendants correctly note that, in }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
, the Seventh Circuit held that inmate workers were not employees protected by the FLSA. However, a careful reading of each case reveals that these were fact-specific rulings, not categorical holdings that inmates can never be FLSA employees. Indeed, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 directed courts to assess the totality of the worker\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s economic reality when determining FLSA coverage, and both \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 counseled that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s holding that prisoners may be FLSA employees should govern cases where a prisoner performs work unrelated to prison operations.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
###### 1. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
: Courts \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67must examine the \u8216\'81\'65economic reality\u8217\'81\'66 of the working relationship.\u8221\'81\'68\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Vanskike, an Illinois prisoner, sued the director of the Illinois Department of Correction under the FLSA for work he performed in Illinois state prisons. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_806&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_806" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
974 F.2d at 806}{}}}\loch
. There is no indication that Vanskike performed any of the work at issue for a private enterprise like the one Mr. Clark alleges.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The Seventh Circuit ultimately determined that Vanskike was not a FLSA employee. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 808}{}}}\loch
. But the court did not }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_933_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_933_1}*933 reach that decision through blunt or simplistic analysis based solely on the plaintiff\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s status as an inmate. Rather, it began: \u8220\'81\'67Because status as an \u8216\'81\'65employee\u8217\'81\'66 for purposes of the FLSA depends on the totality of circumstances rather than on any technical label, courts must examine the \u8216\'81\'65economic reality\u8217\'81\'66 of the working relationship.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike v. Peters, 974 F.2d 806, 808 (7th Cir. 1992)}{}}}\loch
. The court then undertook a fact-specific analysis of Vanskike\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s relationship with his custodians, emphasizing that he performed forced labor for the prison as opposed to voluntary work for a private enterprise. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 808\u8211\'3f12}{}}}\loch
. The court also considered at length that allowing prisons to put their prisoners to work for less than the minimum wage does not interfere with the FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s purpose of eliminating unfair competition in commercial markets. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_811&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_811" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 811\u8211\'3f12}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
All defendants quote }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 for the proposition that the FLSA \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67does not apply to \u8216\'81\'65prisoners who are assigned to work within the prison walls for the prison.\u8217\'81\'66 \u8221\'81\'68 Dkt. 71 at 3; dkt. 73 at 4 (both quoting \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike, 974 F.2d at 808}{}}}\loch
). As a factual matter, this passage does not require dismissal of Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims, which are not based on allegations that he worked \u8220\'81\'67for the prison.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 But the 17-word nugget the defendants quote also is not }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s holding and cannot be the foundation for a broadly applicable, bright-line rule that inmates are never FLSA employees. It comes from a five-page, totality-of-the-circumstances analysis of whether the economic reality of Vanskike\u8217\'81\'66s working relationship with his custodians made him a FLSA employee. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_807&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_807" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 807\u8211\'3f812}{}}}\loch
. Indeed, the paragraph the defendants quote begins: \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67We do not question the conclusions of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1990122383&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Watson [v. Graves, 909 F.2d 1549 (5th Cir.1990)]}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992114380&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Hale [v. Arizona, 967 F.2d 1356 (9th Cir.1992)]}{}}}\loch
 that prisoners are not categorically excluded from the FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s coverage simply because they are prisoners.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 808}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s bottom line is that a prisoner\u8217\'81\'66s status as a FLSA employee is a complicated question requiring a fact-intensive analysis. In \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, the Seventh Circuit undertook the analysis in the case of a prisoner performing forced labor for his custodians. But Mr. Clark sues over voluntary work for a commercial enterprise, so there is no basis for finding that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s\uc1 }{}}}\loch
 fact-intensive analysis would yield the same result. Further, the defendants have not undertaken }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s fact-intensive analysis to the facts of this case, so the Court has no grounds to rely on \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 as a basis for dismissal. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 requires that Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims move forward.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fa796a169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
###### 2. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
: \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67We have no quarrel with ...\uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
.\uc2 \u8221\'81\'68\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Unlike }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 offers almost no factual development. The question at issue was whether inmates of a privately operated Wisconsin prison were FLSA employees. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
395 F.3d at 409}{}}}\loch
. The Court cited }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and cases from other circuits for the broad rule that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67[t]he Fair Labor Standards Act is intended for the protection of employees, and prisoners are not employees of their prison, whether it is a public or a private one.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 The Court emphasized that it had \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67no doubt that the cases\u8221\'81\'68 it \u8220\'81\'67cited are correct\u8221\'81\'68 and that \u8220\'81\'67employment status doesn\u8217\'81\'66t depend on whether the alleged employer is a public or a private body.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 410}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
All defendants cite }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 for the broad rule that prisoners are never FLSA employees. This reading is forgivable given the Court\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s unqualified statement that prisoners \u8220\'81\'67are not protected by the\u8221\'81\'68 FLSA. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_409&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_409" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 409}{}}}\loch
. For four reasons, though, the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 application does not accurately reflect the totality of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 or of the prevailing law of this circuit as it applies to this case.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_934_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_934_1}*934 First, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 does not overturn }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, which held that FLSA coverage is a fact-intensive question and that incarceration is not dispositive. In fact, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 states that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 was \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67no doubt ... correct.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
395 F.3d at 410}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Second, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 undertook a thorough factual analysis and determined that prisoners are not FLSA employees when they perform forced labor for their custodians. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 cannot be read as undertaking the same fact-intensive analysis and determining that prisoners are not FLSA employees when they voluntarily perform work unrelated to prison management for private enterprises. No facts indicate that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s plaintiff worked under circumstances analogous to Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s. To the extent \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 can be read as reaching }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s result under new facts, it can be read only as finding that prisoners are not FLSA employees when they work for private entities contracted to provide custodial services. The example the Seventh Circuit used to illustrate its holding\u8212\'81\'5c\u8220\'81\'67A prison\u8217\'81\'66s decision to hire a catering firm to operate its cafeteria should not influence the entitlements of a prisoner who works in the cafeteria.\u8221\'81\'68\u8212\'81\'5cis plainly distinguishable from Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s allegations that he performed debt collection services for Capital Accounts. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett, 395 F.3d at 410}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Third, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s reasoning does not align with a categorical rule that inmates are never FLSA employees. Although \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 stated that inmates are not covered by the FLSA, it stated more precisely that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67prisoners are not employees of their prison.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
395 F.3d at 410}{}}}\loch
 (emphasis added). The Court explained:}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
> People are not imprisoned for the purpose of enabling them to earn a living. The prison pays for their keep. If it puts them to work, it is to offset some of the cost of keeping them, or to keep them out of mischief, or to ease their transition to the world outside, or to equip them with skills and habits that will make them less likely to return to crime outside. None of these goals is compatible with federal regulation of their wages and hours.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
This reasoning does not align whatsoever with the facts alleged in Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s complaint. The prison did not put him to work in the call center; he worked there of his own accord after being selected by Capital Accounts. His work for Capital Accounts did not offset the costs of his imprisonment; he did not produce anything used in the prison or generate any revenue for the IDOC. His work was not designed to keep him out of mischief or deter recidivism; indeed, he alleges that Capital Accounts directed him to engage in unlawful practices. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 held that Mr. Clark cannot be an employee of his prison, but he does not claim to be an employee of the prison. Rather, he claims to have been an employee of Capital Accounts, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 did not foreclose that possibility.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Fourth, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 expressly approved }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 and endorsed the notion that the FLSA may apply to \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67prisoners working for private companies ... as free laborers\u8221\'81\'68 rather than \u8220\'81\'67as prison labor.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 A decision upholding }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8212\'81\'5cwhich explicitly held that \u8220\'81\'67an inmate may be entitled under the law to receive the federal minimum wage from an outside employer,\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_14&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_14" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
735 F.2d at 14}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8212\'81\'5ccannot be the basis for a brightline rule that prisoners are never FLSA employees.\uc1 }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_fnRef_B00022082982417_ID0ELDAI_1}{\*\bkmkend co_fnRef_B00022082982417_ID0ELDAI_1}[^clark2]}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_935_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_935_1}*935 In short, the Seventh Circuit directed in }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 that a court faced with the question of the FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s application to an inmate\u8217\'81\'66s work must undertake a detailed factual inquiry. The \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 Court completed that inquiry and determined that an inmate performing forced labor for his custodians is not their employee. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 deemed }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and the decisions undergirding it correctly decided and extended its application only to prison labor for private entities contracted to provide custodial services. It does not support the broad rule the defendants advance, and it has no bearing on Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s claims that he provided debt collection services for a private enterprise.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fb663b169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
###### 3. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
: Further Support for }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b\loch
Carter}}}}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
In }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
, a civilly committed sexually violent person sued state officials under }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=L&pubNum=1000546&cite=42USCAS1983&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=LQ&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
42 U.S.C. \uc2 \u167\'81\'98 1983\uc1 }{}}}\loch
 for \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67reducing his pay for the work he perform[ed] at\u8221\'81\'68 his facility. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_813&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_813" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
544 F.3d at 813\u8211\'3f814}{}}}\loch
. The Seventh Circuit\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s decision provides no information about the work Sanders performed, whether he performed it voluntarily, or whether he performed it for his custodians or a separate corporate enterprise.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The Seventh Circuit sua sponte considered Sanders\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 claims under the FLSA and repeated \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s proclamation that \u8220\'81\'67[p]rison and jail inmates are not covered by the FLSA.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_814&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_814" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 814}{}}}\loch
. The Court reasoned in a terse opinion that none of the FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s purposes dictated that a different result should apply to civilly confined sexually violent persons than to prisoners performing compulsory work for their custodians. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}}}}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
As with }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, the defendants have not persuaded the Court that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 isolated statement that \u8220\'81\'67inmates are not covered by the FLSA,\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
id.,}{}}}\loch
 dictates that Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims fail. The cases are not factually analogous. Moreover, \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
 supports its proclamation with citations to }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, which held that FLSA coverage requires a fact-specific inquiry, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, which built on }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and endorsed }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
 also cites }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1996098788&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_42&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_42" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Danneskjold, 82 F.3d at 42}{}}}\loch
, which upheld }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s holding that prisoners can be FLSA employees and adopted \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s fact-intensive economic reality analysis. Although \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1996098788&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Danneskjold}{}}}\loch
 held that the FLSA does not cover \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67prison labor that produces goods or services for the use of the prison,\u8221\'81\'68 it explicitly declined to \u8220\'81\'67address the questions that arise when the prison labor is employed to produce goods or services that are sold in commerce.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1996098788&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_44&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_44" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 44}{}}}\loch
. Those are precisely the questions Mr. Clark has raised, and a decision upholding }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1996098788&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Danneskjold}{}}}\loch
 cannot be the basis for dismissing them.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fbc572169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
##### C. Other District Court Decisions}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The defendants cite a series of District Court decisions for the proposition that a prisoner paid by a private entity for work performed at a prison is not an FLSA employee. But those precedents do not bind this Court, and, with one exception addressed below, they are not on all fours with }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 or this case.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
In }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Lashbrook v. Grace College & Theological Seminary, No. 2:15-cv-00206-JMS-MJD, 2016 WL 7242462 (S.D. Ind. Dec. 15, 2016)}{}}}\loch
, this Court found that an inmate paid by a private college to work as a teaching }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_936_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_936_1}*936 assistant and tutor for inmate students was not an employee under the FLSA. But the Court reached that determination after completing a detailed, fact-intensive inquiry into the contractual relationship between the IDOC and the college and the stated purposes of the tutoring program. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at *5\u8211\'3f7}{}}}\loch
. The defendants do not ask the Court to resolve this case on the same grounds as }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Lashbrook}{}}}\loch
. They do not ask the Court to engage in any factual analysis at all. Rather, they ask the Court to apply a broad rule that was never even considered in }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Lashbrook}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Further, critical factual considerations in }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Lashbrook}{}}}\loch
 do not appear to apply in this case. Lashbrook provided services to other inmates and ultimately for their benefit, not for the benefit of the College. By contrast, Mr. Clark worked for Capital Accounts for the purpose of generating profits for Capital Accounts\uc2 \u8212\'81\'5cnot to provide any benefit to the IDOC or the inmates in its custody. In \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Lashbrook}{}}}\loch
, this Court found that the College would not have used tutors except at the IDOC\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s urging. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at *2}{}}}\loch
. In other words, it would have offered courses at the prison without tutors and involved inmates as tutors only at the IDOC\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s request. It was not competing with other educational institutions to provide educational services in the prison, and excepting inmate tutors from the FLSA did not defeat the law\u8217\'81\'66s purpose of preventing \u8220\'81\'67unfair competition in commerce.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2040535839&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at *6\u8211\'3f7}{}}}\loch
. By contrast, it appears that Capital Accounts operates its for-profit call center at WVCF because WVCF can offer inexpensive labor. Further, that access to inexpensive labor would appear to give Capital Accounts a distinct advantage over other debt collection services that must comply with the FLSA.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2049504948&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_999_2&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_999_2" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Buie v. Aramark Co., No. 19-CV-76-JPS, 2019 WL 5558382, at *2 (E.D. Wis. Oct. 28, 2019)}{}}}\loch
 considered an inmate \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67assigned to work\u8221\'81\'68 in the prison kitchen for its private food-service contractor. But Buie was assigned to work in the kitchen and ultimately provided services to inmates and defrayed the state\u8217\'81\'66s cost of incarcerating them. These facts do not parallel Mr. Clark\u8217\'81\'66s allegations that he was not compelled by the IDOC to work at the call center and that his work exclusively benefitted Capital Accounts rather than providing service to inmates or defraying the cost of incarcerating them. Further, \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2049504948&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_999_2&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_999_2" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Buie}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s facts fall squarely within the holding of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 and the hypothetical case it created to illustrate its holding. See }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
395 F.3d at 410}{}}}\loch
 (\uc2 \u8220\'81\'67A prison\u8217\'81\'66s decision to hire a catering firm to operate its cafeteria should not influence the entitlements of a prisoner who works in the cafeteria.\u8221\'81\'68). For the reasons set out above, \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 does not call for the dismissal of Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims, and neither can a District Court decision applying \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
In }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2056107059&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bridges v. Carter, No. 3:22-CV-7-JD-MGG, 2022 WL 1238569 (N.D. Ind. Apr. 26, 2022)}{}}}\loch
, the Northern District of Indiana considered a constitutional challenge to the deduction of room and board costs from a prisoner\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s pay from a private company. The court ultimately held that there was clear authority allowing the IDOC to take the deductions. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2056107059&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at *2}{}}}\loch
. The court stated as part of its reasoning that Bridges had \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67no claim\u8221\'81\'68 under the FLSA \u8220\'81\'67to receive any particular amount as wages,\u8221\'81\'68 but the factual presentation does not address any details of Bridges\u8217\'81\'66 work or wages. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2056107059&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id.}{}}}\loch
 It is not clear who benefitted from Bridges\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 work or even that Bridges was paid less than the minimum wage, even after deductions.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2056193621&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Eltzroth v. Klutz, No. 3:21-CV-605-DRL-MGG, 2022 WL 1449607 (N.D. Ind. May 6, 2022)}{}}}\loch
, was another constitutional challenge to pay deductions and was resolved on the same grounds. The factual discussion indicates that Eltzroth was paid at least the minimum wage, see }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2056193621&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
id. at *1}{}}}\loch
, and there is }{\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_pp_sp_7903_937_1}{\*\bkmkend co_pp_sp_7903_937_1}*937 no indication he asserted any claim or argument based on FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s wage requirements.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc3aa2169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
##### D. Vanderpool: A Respectful Disagreement}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
That leaves Vanderpool v. Capital Accounts, No. 2:22-cv-00403-JPH-MKK, dkt. 56 (S.D. Ind. Mar. 11, 2024), a lawsuit identical to this one filed by another inmate who worked for pennies at the WVCF call center. Judge Hanlon granted a motion to dismiss by Capital Accounts, finding that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
 \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67hold\u8212\'81\'5cbroadly as a matter of law\u8212\'81\'5cthat prisoners are not employees under the FLSA.\u8221\'81\'68 Id. at 5. For the reasons set out above, the Court respectfully disagrees with that broad reading of those precedents.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
Judge Hanlon also relied on }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2037256596&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_314&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_314" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Smith v. Dart, 803 F.3d 304, 314 (7th Cir. 2015)}{}}}\loch
, which echoed }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
 and concluded that, \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67like prisoners and civil detainees, pretrial detainees are not protected by the FLSA because they are not employees of their prison.\u8221\'81\'68 Like \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 and }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
, though, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2037256596&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Smith}{}}}\loch
 left }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and its requirement of a fact-specific assessment of the worker\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s economic reality in place. Moreover, Smith worked \u8220\'81\'67in the jail laundry,\u8221\'81\'68 not for a private commercial enterprise like Capital Accounts. \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2037256596&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_307&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_307" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
803 F.3d at 307}{}}}\loch
. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2037256596&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Smith}{}}}\loch
 is no more of a basis for dismissing Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s claims than \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
, or }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2016981553&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Sanders}{}}}\loch
.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
It is fundamental that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67a district court decision does not have stare decisis effect; it is not a precedent.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2006520370&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_457&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_457" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Midlock v. Apple Vacations West, 406 F.3d 453, 457 (7th Cir. 2005)}{}}}\loch
. \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67The fact of such a decision is not a reason for following it.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2006520370&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_458&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_458" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 458}{}}}\loch
. For the reasons set out above, the Court respectfully disagrees with the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 interpretation of the Seventh Circuit\u8217\'81\'66s FLSA precedents and, by extension Judge Hanlon\u8217\'81\'66s decision in Vanderpool applying that interpretation.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch
{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkstart co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}{\*\bkmkend co_anchor_I6fc8651169b011f086b38824ae40a Copy 1}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
##### E. Conclusion}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The Seventh Circuit has not directly confronted the question of whether the FLSA protects an inmate hired, supervised, and paid by a private, for-profit company to work on prison grounds for the exclusive purpose of enriching the private company. The defendants here do not address that question either and instead ask the Court to dismiss Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims for the sole reason that he is a prisoner.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{
\~}
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar{\loch
The Seventh Circuit has held, unambiguously, that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67status as an \u8216\'81\'65employee\u8217\'81\'66 for purposes of the FLSA depends on the totality of circumstances rather than on any technical label,\u8221\'81\'68 so \u8220\'81\'67courts must examine the \u8216\'81\'65economic reality\u8217\'81\'66 of the working relationship.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_808&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_808" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike, 974 F.2d at 808}{}}}\loch
. It has repeatedly endorsed }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
, which held \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67that an inmate may be entitled under the law to receive the federal minimum wage from an outside employer.\u8221\'81\'68 \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_350_13&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_350_13" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Id. at 13\u8211\'3f14}{}}}\loch
. The defendants ask this Court to bypass the analysis required by }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
 and ignore the clear rule it adopted from }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000999&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs20\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
. Because the defendants offer no other grounds for dismissing Mr. Clark\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s FLSA claims, the Court denies their motions.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \trowd\trql\trleft0\ltrrow\trpaddft3\trpaddt0\trpaddfl3\trpaddl0\trpaddfb3\trpaddb0\trpaddfr3\trpaddr0\cellx10080\pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\intbl\ql\ltrpar{\loch
[^clark1]: Subsequent Second Circuit decisions have modified the precise contours of the economic reality inquiry but have not abandoned its holding that inmate labor is not categorically beyond the FLSA\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s wage protections. See \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1996098788&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_40&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_40" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Danneskjold v. Hausrath, 82 F.3d 37, 40\u8211\'3f41 (2d Cir. 1996)}{}}}\loch
 (\uc2 \u8220\'81\'67Although we do not disturb Carter\u8217\'81\'66s rejection of a rule that a prisoner\u8217\'81\'66s labor is at all times and in all circumstances exempt from the FLSA, or discard use of an economic reality test to determine whether such labor is subject to the FLSA, we do reexamine and reject its use of the four-part \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1983121197&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bonnette [v. California Health and Welfare Agency, 704 F.2d 1465 (9th Cir. 1983)]}{}}}\loch
 test to make that determination.\uc2 \u8221\'81\'68). The Court does not concern itself here with the precise factors to be considered in determining whether a prisoner\u8217\'81\'66s work is covered by the FLSA because the defendants seek dismissal only on the basis that no prisoner\u8217\'81\'66s work is ever covered.\uc1 }
\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\intbl\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\intbl\itap2\ql\ltrpar{\loch
[^clark2]: The corporate defendants correctly note that }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s endorsement of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 includes a reference to inmates working \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67as free labor,\u8221\'81\'68 \u8220\'81\'67for private companies under work-release programs.\u8221\'81\'68 Dkt. 86 at 2; \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&fi=co_pp_sp_506_410&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)#co_pp_sp_506_410" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i0\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett, 395 F.3d at 410}{}}}\loch
. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 concerns work performed in an educational program offered inside a prison, so the Court does not read }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66s endorsement of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 as holding that \uc2 \u8220\'81\'67the only exceptional circumstance in which ... a prisoner may be considered an employee under the FLSA is when he is working as a free laborer outside the prison under work-release programs in transition to their expected discharge from the prison.\u8221\'81\'68 Dkt. 86 at 2. Regardless, any ambiguity about the value of \uc1 }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1984124206&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Carter}{}}}\loch
 in this Circuit has no bearing on the outcome of this case. }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=2005997424&pubNum=0000506&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Bennett}{}}}\loch
 built on }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://www.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1992153391&pubNum=0000350&originatingDoc=I25d8d590f5c311efae3cdd08712d16e0&refType=RP&originationContext=document&vr=3.0&rs=cblt1.0&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Keycite)" }{\fldrslt {\loch\hich\af5\loch\cf18\strike0\f5\fs18\i\ulnone\ulc0\b0\loch
Vanskike}{}}}\loch
, which requires a fact-specific analysis and rejected the prisoners-are-never-employees rule at the heart of the defendants\uc2 \u8217\'81\'66 motion.\uc1 }\nestcell{\*\nesttableprops\trowd\trql\trleft0\ltrrow\trpaddft3\trpaddt0\trpaddfl3\trpaddl0\trpaddfb3\trpaddb0\trpaddfr3\trpaddr0\cellx10080\nestrow}{\nonesttables\par}\pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\intbl\ql\ltrpar\loch
\cell\row\pard \pard\plain \s0\rtlch\af10\afs24\alang1081 \ltrch\lang1033\langfe2052\hich\af4\loch\nowidctlpar\hyphpar0\ltrpar\cf0\f4\fs24\lang1033\kerning1\dbch\af11\langfe2052\ql\ltrpar\loch

\par }